922 KAR 2:090. Child-care center licensure.
RELATES TO: KRS Chapter 13B, Chapter 157, 158.030, 199.011(3), (4), (16), 199.892, 199.894(1), (3), 199.895, 199.896, 199.898, 214.010, 314.011(5), 600.020(1), 620.020(8), 620.030, 45 C.F.R. 98.2, 42 U.S.C. 601-619, 42 U.S.C. 9857-9858q
STATUTORY AUTHORITY: KRS 194A.050(1), 199.896(2), (6)
NECESSITY, FUNCTION, AND CONFORMITY: KRS 194A.050(1) requires the Secretary of the Cabinet for Health and Family Services to promulgate administrative regulations necessary to operate programs and fulfill the responsibilities vested in the cabinet, qualify for the receipt of federal funds, and cooperate with other state and federal agencies for the proper administra- tion of the cabinet and its programs. KRS 199.896(2) authorizes the Cabinet for Health and Family Services to promulgate administrative regulations to establish license fees and stand- ards for a child-care center. KRS 199.896(6) requires the cabinet to establish an informal dis- pute resolution process. This administrative regulation establishes licensure standards for a child-care center and describes the informal dispute resolution process.
Section 1. Definitions. (1) "Applicant" means an individual or entity applying to become a li- censee or renew status as a licensee.
(2) "Cabinet" is defined by KRS 199.011(3) and 199.894(1).
(3) "Child" is defined by KRS 199.011(4).
(4) "Child care" means care of a child in a center or home that regularly provides full or part-
time care, day or night, and includes developmentally appropriate play and learning activities. (5) "Child-care center" is defined by KRS 199.894(3).
(6) "Director" means an individual who meets the education and training requirements es-
tablished in Section 10 of this administrative regulation.
(7) "Finding of fraud" means a suspected intentional program violation referred in accord-
ance with 922 KAR 2:020, Section 4(4)(a)1, that is accepted for investigation and substantiat- ed by the cabinet’s Office of Inspector General.
(8) "Health professional" means a person actively licensed as a: (a) Physician;
(b) Physician assistant;
(c) Advanced practice registered nurse; or
(d) Registered nurse as defined by KRS 314.011(5) under the supervision of a physician or advanced practice registered nurse.
(9) "Infant" means a child who is less than twelve (12) months of age.
(10) "Licensee" means the owner or operator of a child-care center to include: (a) Sole proprietor;
(b) Corporation;
(c) Limited liability company;
(d) Partnership;
(e) Association; or
(f) Organization, such as:
1. Board of education,
2. Private school;
3. Faith-based organization;
4. Government agency; or
5. Institution.
(11) "Nontraditional hours" means the hours of:
(a) 7 p.m. through 5 a.m. Monday through Friday; or
Legislative Research Commission PDF Version
Page: 1

(b) 7 p.m. on Friday until 5 a.m. on Monday.
(12) "Parent" is defined by 45 C.F.R. 98.2.
(13) "Parental or family participation" means a child-care center’s provision of information or
inclusion of a child’s parent in the child-care center’s activities, including: (a) Distribution of a newsletter;
(b) Distribution of a program calendar; or
(c) A conference between the provider and a parent.
(14) "Pediatric abusive head trauma" is defined by KRS 620.020(8).
(15) "Premises" means the building and contiguous property in which child care is licensed. (16) "Preschool-age" means a child who is older than a toddler and younger than school-
age.
(17) "Qualified substitute" means a person who meets the requirements of a staff person es-
tablished in Section 11 of this administrative regulation.
(18) "School-age" means a child who meets the age requirements of KRS 158.030 or who
attends kindergarten, elementary, or secondary education.
(19) "Secretary" is defined by KRS 199.011(16).
(20) "Toddler" means a child between the age of twelve (12) and thirty-six (36) months.
Section 2. Child-care Centers. The following child-care centers shall meet the requirements of this administrative regulation:
(1) A Type I child-care center. This child-care center shall be licensed to regularly provide child care services for:
(a) Four (4) or more children in a nonresidential setting; or
(b) Thirteen (13) or more children in a designated space separate from the primary resi- dence of a licensee; and
(2) A Type II child-care center. This child-care center shall be primary residence of the li- censee in which child care is regularly provided for seven (7), but not more than twelve (12), children including children related to the licensee.
Section 3. Exempt Child Care Settings. The following child-care settings shall be exempt from licensure requirements of this administrative regulation, 922 KAR 2:120, and 922 KAR 2:280:
(1) Summer camps certified by the cabinet as youth camps that serve school-age children; (2) Kindergarten through grade 12 in private schools while school is in session;
(3) All programs and preschools regulated by the Kentucky Department of Education gov-
erned by KRS Chapter 157;
(4) Summer programs operated by a religious organization that a child attends no longer
than two (2) weeks;
(5) Child care provided while parents are on the premises, other than the employment and
educational site of parents;
(6) Child care programs operated by the armed services located on an armed forces base; (7) Child care provided by educational programs that include parental involvement with the
care of the child and the development of parenting skills;
(8) Facilities operated by a religious organization while religious services are being conduct-
ed;
(9) A program providing instructional and educational programs that:
(a) Operates for a maximum of twenty (20) hours per week; and
(b) A child attends for no more than ten (10) hours per week;
(10) A child-care center that meets requirements of KRS 199.896(19) or (20); and
Legislative Research Commission PDF Version
Page: 2

(11) An after-school program, which is:
(a) A continuation of the school day during the academic year;
(b) Operated and staffed by an accredited private or public school under the purview of the
Kentucky Department of Education; and
(c) Not participating in the Child Care Assistance Program in accordance with 922 KAR
2:160.
Section 4. Application. (1) An applicant for a license shall submit to the cabinet a completed OIG-DRCC-01, Initial Child-Care Center License Application.
(2) Approval of an applicant for initial licensure shall result in the issuance of a preliminary license for a probationary period not to exceed six (6) months.
(3) The issuance of a preliminary license, or the issuance or reapproval of a regular license, shall be governed under the provisions of this section and Sections 6 and 7 of this administra- tive regulation.
(4) If the applicant for licensure is a:
(a) Corporation or a limited liability company, the application shall include a current certifi- cate of existence or authorization from the Secretary of State; or
(b) Partnership, the application shall include:
1. A written statement from each partner assuring that the partnership is current and viable; and
2. Proof that each individual is twenty-one (21) years or older by photo identification or birth certificate.
(5) If the status of a corporation, partnership, or ownership of the child-care center changes, the new entity shall submit a completed OIG-DRCC-01.
(6) If ownership of a child-care center changes and the cabinet approves preliminary licen- sure upon inspection of the child-care center under the new ownership, the effective date on the preliminary license shall be the date of the approved inspection under the new ownership.
(7) The cabinet shall return the OIG-DRCC-01 and accompanying fee to an applicant if the applicant:
(a) Has an ownership interest in a facility that is licensed or regulated by the cabinet, and that is subject to a finding of fraud or is involved in an investigation of alleged fraud by:
1. The cabinet’s Office of Inspector General; or 2. An agency with investigative authority; and (b) Is requesting a:
1. Change in ownership; or
2. License for a new facility.
(8) An applicant shall submit to background checks in accordance with 922 KAR 2:280.
(9) A child may include a person eighteen (18) years of age if the person has a special need
for which child care is required.
Section 5. Evacuation Plan. (1) A licensed child-care center shall have a written evacuation plan in the event of a fire, natural disaster, or other threatening situation that may pose a health or safety hazard for a child in care in accordance with KRS 199.895 and 42 U.S.C. 9858c(c)(2)(U).
(2) The cabinet shall post an online template of an evacuation plan that: (a) Fulfills requirements of KRS 199.895;
(b) Is optional for a child-care center’s use; and
(c) Is available to a licensed child-care center without charge.
Legislative Research Commission PDF Version
Page: 3

Section 6. License Issuance. (1) The cabinet shall monitor a child-care center that operates under a preliminary license issued pursuant to Section 4(2) of this administrative regulation.
(2) Upon completion of the probationary period required in Section 4(2) of this administrative regulation, the cabinet shall:
(a) Approve regular licensure for a child-care center operating under a preliminary license; or
(b) If a condition specified in Section 16 of this administrative regulation exists, deny regular licensure.
(3) A preliminary or regular license shall not be issued unless each background check re- quired by 922 KAR 2:280 has been completed on behalf of an applicant for licensure.
(4) Background checks in accordance with 922 KAR 2:280 shall apply to:
(a) An applicant;
(b) A director;
(c) An employee who is present during the time a child is receiving care;
(d) Any person with supervisory or disciplinary control over a child in care; or (e) A person in accordance with 42 U.S.C. 9858f and 45 C.F.R. 98.43.
(5) If an applicant for licensure has had a previous ownership interest in a child-care provid- er that has had a prior certification, license, or registration denied, revoked, or voluntarily relin- quished as a result of an investigation or pending adverse action, the cabinet shall grant the applicant a license if:
(a) A seven (7) year period has expired from the:
1. Date of the prior denial or revocation;
2. Date the certification, license, or registration was voluntarily relinquished as a result of an
investigation or pending adverse action;
3. Last day of legal remedies being exhausted; or
4. Administrative hearing decision; and
(b) The applicant has:
1. Demonstrated compliance with the provisions of this administrative regulation, 922 KAR
2:120, 922 KAR 2:280, and KRS 199.896;
2. Completed, since the time of the prior denial, revocation, or relinquishment, sixty (60)
hours of training in child development and child care practice, approved by the cabinet or its designee; and
3. Not had an application, certification, license, or registration denied, revoked, or voluntarily relinquished as a result of an investigation or pending adverse action:
a. For one (1) of the reasons set forth in: (i) KRS 199.896(19); or
(ii) 922 KAR 2:280; or
b. Due to a disqualification from:
(i) The Child Care Assistance Program established by 922 KAR 2:160, including an inten- tional program violation in accordance with 922 KAR 2:020; or
(ii) Another governmental assistance program for fraud, abuse, or criminal conviction related to that program.
(6) If a license is granted after the seven (7) year period specified in subsection (5)(a) of this section, the licensee shall serve a two (2) year probationary period during which the child-care center shall be inspected no less than semi-annually.
(7) A preliminary or regular license shall specify: (a) A particular premises;
(b) A designated licensee;
(c) Age category of the children in care;
Legislative Research Commission PDF Version
Page: 4

(d) The maximum number of children allowed under center supervision at one (1) time, in- cluding a child related to the licensee or an employee, based upon:
1. Available space as determined by the State Fire Marshal's Office in conjunction with the cabinet;
2. Adequacy of program;
3. Equipment; and
4. Staff;
(e) If provided, nontraditional hours;
(f) If provided, transportation; and
(g) A list of services to be provided by the child-care center.
(8) To qualify for a preliminary license, or maintain a regular license, a child-care center
shall:
(a) Provide written documentation from the local authority showing compliance with local
zoning requirements;
(b) Be approved by the Office of the State Fire Marshal or designee;
(c) Have an approved water and sewage system in accordance with local, county, and state
laws;
(d) Provide written proof of liability insurance coverage of at least $100,000 per occurrence;
(e) 2:280;
Comply with provisions of this administrative regulation, 922 KAR 2:120, and 922 KAR
(f) Cooperate with the cabinet, the cabinet’s designee, or another agency with regulatory au- thority during:
1. An investigation of an alleged complaint, including an allegation of child abuse or neglect pursuant to KRS 620.030(4); and
2. Unannounced inspections; and
(g) Have a director who meets the requirements listed in Section 10 of this administrative regulation.
(9) A child-care center shall allow the cabinet or its designee, another agency with regulato- ry authority, and a parent of an enrolled child unannounced access to the child-care center during the hours of operation.
(10) Denial of access, including any effort to delay, interfere with, or obstruct an effort by a representative of the cabinet or another agency with regulatory authority, to enter the child- care center or deny access to records relevant to the inspection shall result in the cabinet pur- suing adverse action in accordance with Section 15, 16, or 17 of this administrative regulation.
(11) A regular license shall be issued if the center has met the requirements contained in this administrative regulation, 922 KAR 2:120, 922 KAR 2:280, and KRS 199.896(3), (13), (15), (16), (18), and (19).
(12) A preliminary or regular license shall not be sold or transferred.
(13) A child-care center shall not begin operation without a preliminary license to operate from the cabinet.
(14) A child-care center operating without a preliminary or regular license shall be subject to legal action.
(15) The voluntary relinquishment of a preliminary or regular license shall not preclude the cabinet’s pursuit of adverse action.
Section 7. Fees. (1) A nonrefundable initial licensing fee of fifty (50) dollars shall be charged according to KRS 199.896(3).
(2) A nonrefundable renewal fee of twenty-five (25) dollars shall be charged in accordance with KRS 199.896(3).
Legislative Research Commission PDF Version Page: 5

(3) Licensing fees shall be:
(a) Payable to the Kentucky State Treasurer; (b) Attached to the licensure application; and (c) Paid by:
1. Cashier’s check;
2. Certified check;
3. Business check; or
4. Money order.
Section 8. General. (1) A licensee shall be responsible for the operation of the child-care center pursuant to this administrative regulation, 922 KAR 2:120, and 922 KAR 2:280.
(2) Child-care center staff shall be:
(a) Instructed by the child-care center’s director regarding requirements for operation; and (b) Provided with a copy of this administrative regulation, 922 KAR 2:120, and 922 KAR
2:280.
(3) A volunteer or board member shall comply with the policies and procedures of the child-
care center.
(4) Program policies and procedures shall:
(a) Be in writing; and
(b) Include:
1. Staff policies;
2. Job descriptions;
3. An organization chart;
4. Chain of command; and
5. Other procedures necessary to ensure implementation of:
a. KRS 199.898, Rights for children in child-care programs and their parents, custodians, or
guardians - posting and distribution requirements;
b. 922 KAR 2:120, Child-care center health and safety standards;
c. 922 KAR 2:280, Background checks for child care staff members, reporting requirements,
and appeals; and
d. This administrative regulation.
(5) An activity of a person living in a child-care center that is a dwelling unit shall not inter-
fere with the child-care center program.
(6) In addition to the posting requirement of KRS 199.898(3), a child-care center shall post
the following in a conspicuous place and make available for public inspection:
(a) The provider’s preliminary or regular license;
(b) Each statement of deficiency and civil penalty notice issued by the cabinet during the
current licensure year;
(c) Each plan of correction submitted by the child-care center to the cabinet during the cur-
rent licensure year;
(d) Information on the Kentucky Consumer Product Safety Program and the program's Web
site as specified in KRS 199.897;
(e) A description of services provided by the child-care center, including:
1. Current rates for child care; and
2. Each service charged separately and in addition to the basic rate for child care;
(f) Minimum staff-to-child ratios and group size established in 922 KAR 2:120; and
(g) Daily planned program.
(7) If a director, employee, volunteer, or any person with supervisory or disciplinary control
over, or having unsupervised contact with a child in care is named as the alleged perpetrator in
Legislative Research Commission PDF Version Page: 6

a child abuse or neglect report accepted by the cabinet in accordance with 922 KAR 1:330, the individual shall be removed from direct contact with a child in care:
(a) For the duration of the assessment or investigation; and
(b) Pending completion of the administrative appeal process for a cabinet substantiation of child abuse or neglect in accordance with 922 KAR 1:320 or 922 KAR 1:480.
Section 9. Records. (1) A child-care center shall maintain:
(a) A current immunization certificate for each child in care within thirty (30) days of the child’s enrollment, unless an attending physician or the child’s parent objects to the immuniza- tion of the child pursuant to KRS 214.036;
(b) A written record for each child:
1. Completed and signed by the child’s parent;
2. Retained on file on the first day the child attends the child-care center; and
3. To contain:
a. Identifying information about the child, which includes, at a minimum, the child’s name,
address, and date of birth;
b. Contact information to enable a person in charge to contact the child’s:
(i) Parent at the parent’s home or place of employment;
(ii) Family physician; and
(iii) Preferred hospital;
c. The name of each person who is designated in writing to pick-up the child;
d. The child’s general health status and medical history including, if applicable:
(i) Allergies;
(ii) Restriction on the child’s participation in activities with specific instructions from the
child’s parent or health professional; and
(iii) Permission from the parent for third-party professional services in the child-care center; e. The name and phone number of each person to be contacted in an emergency involving
or impacting the child;
f. Authorization by the parent for the child-care center to seek emergency medical care for
the child in the parent’s absence; and
g. A permission form for each trip off the premises signed by the child’s parent in accord-
ance with 922 KAR 2:120, Section 12;
(c) Daily attendance records documenting the arrival and departure time of each child, in-
cluding records that are required in accordance with 922 KAR 2:160, Section 13, if a child re- ceives services from the child-care center through the Child Care Assistance Program;
(d) A written schedule of staff working hours;
(e) A current personnel file for each child-care center staff person to include:
1. Name, address, date of birth, and date of employment;
2. Proof of educational qualifications;
3. Record of annual performance evaluation;
4. Documentation of compliance with tuberculosis screening in accordance with Section
11(1)(b) of this administrative regulation; and
5. The results of background checks conducted in accordance with 922 KAR 2:280;
(f) A written annual plan for child-care staff professional development;
(g) A written evacuation plan in accordance with Section 5 of this administrative regulation; (h) A written record of quarterly practiced earthquake drills and tornado drills detailing the
date, time, and children who participated in accordance with 922 KAR 2:120, Section 3;
(i) A written record of practiced fire drills conducted monthly detailing the date, time, and
children who participated in accordance with 922 KAR 2:120, Section 3;
Legislative Research Commission PDF Version Page: 7

(j) A written plan and diagram outlining the course of action in the event of a natural or manmade disaster, posted in a prominent place;
(k) A written record of reports to the cabinet required in Section 12 of this administrative regulation; and
(l) A written record of transportation services provided in accordance with 922 KAR 2:120, Section 12.
(2) A child-care center shall:
(a) Maintain the confidentiality of a child’s record and information concerning a child or the child’s parent;
(b) Maintain all records for five (5) years; and
(c) Provide the cabinet access and information in the completion of the investigation pursu- ant to KRS 620.030(4) and (5).
Section 10. Director Requirements and Responsibilities. (1) A director shall:
(a) Be at least twenty-one (21) years of age;
(b) Have a high school diploma, a general equivalency diploma (GED), or qualifying docu-
mentation from a comparable educational entity;
(c) Not be employed in a position other than an onsite child care director, or director of mul-
tiple facilities, during the hours the child-care center is in operation;
(d) Ensure:
1. Compliance with 922 KAR 2:120, 922 KAR 2:280, and this administrative regulation; and 2. The designation of one (1) adult staff person in charge to carry out the director’s duties if
the director is not present in the child-care center during operating hours. The director shall be responsible for the actions of the designee during the director’s absence;
(e) Manage the staff in their individual job descriptions;
(f) Assure the development, implementation, and monitoring of child-care center plans, poli- cies, and procedures;
(g) Supervise staff conduct to ensure implementation of program policies and procedures;
(h) Post a schedule of daily activities, to include dates and times of activities to be conduct- ed with the children in each classroom;
(i) Conduct, manage, and document in writing recurring staff meetings;
(j) Assess each staff person's interaction with children in care and classroom performance through an annual written performance evaluation;
(k) Assure that additional staff are available during cooking and cleaning hours, if neces- sary, to maintain staff-to-child ratios pursuant to 922 KAR 2:120;
(l) Assure the health, safety, and comfort of each child;
(m) Notify the parent immediately of an accident or incident requiring medical treatment of a child;
(n) Assure that a person acting as a caregiver of a child in care shall not be left alone with a child, if the licensee has not received the results of the background checks as described in 922 KAR 2:280;
(o) Assure each mandatory record specified in Section 9 of this administrative regulation has not been altered or falsified;
(p) Coordinate at least one (1) annual activity involving parental or family participation; and
(q) Not have had previous ownership interest in a child-care provider that had its certifica- tion, license, or registration denied or revoked.
(2) The director of a Type I child-care center shall meet one (1) of the following educational requirements:
(a) Master's degree in education or child development field;
Legislative Research Commission PDF Version Page: 8

(b) Bachelor's degree in education or child development field;
(c) Master's degree or a bachelor's degree in a field other than education or child develop- ment, including a degree in pastoral care and counseling, plus twelve (12) clock hours of child development training;
(d) Associate degree in Early Childhood Education and Development;
(e) Associate degree in a field other than Early Childhood Education and Development, plus twelve (12) clock hours of child development training, and two (2) years of verifiable full-time paid experience working directly with children;
(f) A Director’s Credential in Early Childhood Development and one (1) year of verifiable full- time paid experience working directly with children in:
1. A school-based program following Department of Education guidelines;
2. An early childhood development program, such as Head Start; or
3. A licensed or certified child-care program;
(g) Child development associate plus one (1) year of verifiable paid experience working di-
rectly with children in:
1. A school-based program following Department of Education guidelines;
2. An early childhood development program, such as Head Start; or
3. A licensed or certified child-care program; or
(h) Three (3) years of verifiable full-time paid experience working directly with children in: 1. A school-based program following Department of Education guidelines;
2. An early childhood development program, such as Head Start; or
3. A licensed or certified child-care program.
(3) The director of a Type II child-care center shall:
(a) Meet the requirements in subsection (2) of this section; or
(b) Meet two (2) of the following:
1. Have twelve (12) hours of orientation and child development training;
2. Have one (1) year of verifiable full-time paid experience working directly with children in: a. A school-based program following Department of Education guidelines;
b. An early childhood development program, such as Head Start; or
c. A licensed or certified child-care program; or
3. Obtain six (6) additional hours of training in child day care program administration.
Section 11. Staff Requirements. (1) Child-care center staff:
(a) Hired after January 1, 2009, who have supervisory power over a minor and are not en- rolled in secondary education, shall have a:
1. High school diploma;
2. GED or qualifying documentation from a comparable educational entity; or
3. Commonwealth Child Care Credential as described in 922 KAR 2:250; and
(b) Shall provide, prior to employment and every two (2) years thereafter:
1. A statement from a health professional that the individual is free of active tuberculosis; or 2. A copy of negative tuberculin results.
(2)(a) A child-care center shall not employ a person:
1. With a disqualifying background check result in accordance with 922 KAR 2:280; or
2. Determined by a physician to have a health condition that renders the person unable to
care for children.
(b) An individual described in Section 6(4) of this administrative regulation shall report to the
licensee if the individual:
1. Meets a disqualifying criterion or has a disqualifying background check result as specified
in 922 KAR 2:280;
Legislative Research Commission PDF Version Page: 9

2. Is the subject of a cabinet child abuse or neglect investigation; or
3. Is determined by a physician to have a health condition that renders the person unable to care for children.
(3) For a child-care center licensed for infant, toddler, or preschool-age children, at least one (1) person on duty and present with the children shall be currently certified by a cabinet- approved training agency in the following skills:
(a) Infant and child cardiopulmonary resuscitation; and
(b) Infant and child first aid.
(4) For a child-care center licensed for school-age children, at least one (1) person on duty
and present with the children shall be currently certified by a cabinet-approved training agency in the following skills:
(a) Adult cardiopulmonary resuscitation; and
(b) First aid.
(5) Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and first aid training shall be in addition to the fif-
teen (15) clock hours requirement in subsection (16) of this section.
(6) Child-care centers shall have available in case of need:
(a) One (1) qualified substitute staff person for a Type II child-care center; or
(b) Two (2) qualified substitute staff persons for a Type I child-care center.
(7) Each qualified substitute staff person shall:
(a) Meet the staff requirements of this administrative regulation; and
(b) Provide the required documentation to verify compliance with this administrative regula-
tion.
(8) A qualified substitute who works in more than one (1) licensed child-care center shall
provide the required documentation to verify compliance with this administrative regulation at the time of employment with each child-care center.
(9) If the operator of a Type II child-care center is unable to provide care in accordance with this administrative regulation, 922 KAR 2:280, or 922 KAR 2:120, the Type II child-care center shall:
(a) Close temporarily until the operator is able to resume compliance; and
(b) Immediately notify parents of enrolled children of the temporary closure.
(10) The minimum number of adult workers in a child-care center shall be sufficient to en-
sure that:
(a) Minimum staff-to-child ratios in accordance with 922 KAR 2:120 are followed;
(b) Each staff person under eighteen (18) years of age and each student trainee are under
the direct supervision of a qualified staff person who meets the requirements of this section; and
(c) Unless providing care with a qualified staff person, a person under the age of eighteen (18) shall not be counted as staff for the staff-to-child ratio.
(11) Except for medication as prescribed by a physician, a controlled substance shall not be permitted on the premises during hours of operation.
(12) Alcohol shall:
(a) Not be consumed by any person on the licensed child-care center’s premises during hours of operation; and
(b) Be kept out of reach and sight of a child in care.
(13) Each staff person shall remain awake while on duty except as specified in 922 KAR 2:120, Section 2(11)(f).
(14) For each adult residing at a Type II child-care center, the results of the following shall be maintained on file at the center:
(a) Background checks conducted in accordance with 922 KAR 2:280; and
Legislative Research Commission PDF Version Page: 10

(b) A copy of negative tuberculin results or a health professional’s statement documenting that the adult is free of tuberculosis. Every two (2) years, the adult shall provide negative tu- berculin results or health professional’s statement documenting that the adult is free of tuber- culosis.
(15) If a new adult begins residing in a Type II child-care center, the adult shall submit to background and health checks within thirty (30) calendar days of residence within the house- hold.
(16) In accordance with KRS 199.896(15) and (16), a staff person with supervisory authority over a child shall complete the following:
(a) Six (6) hours of cabinet-approved orientation within the first three (3) months of employ- ment;
(b) Nine (9) hours of cabinet-approved early care and education training within the first year of employment, including one and one-half (1 1/2) hours of cabinet-approved pediatric abusive head trauma training; and
(c) Fifteen (15) hours of cabinet-approved early care and education training during each subsequent year of employment, including one and one-half (1 1/2) hours of cabinet-approved pediatric abusive head trauma training completed once every five (5) years.
(17) A staff person’s compliance with training requirements of this section shall be verified through the cabinet-designated database maintained pursuant to 922 KAR 2:240.
Section 12. Reports. (1) The following shall be reported to the cabinet or designee and other agencies specified in this section within twenty-four (24) hours from the time of discovery:
(a) Communicable disease, which shall also be reported to the local health department pur- suant to KRS 214.010;
(b) An accident or injury to a child that requires medical care initiated by the child-care cen- ter or the child’s parent;
(c) An incident that results in legal action by or against the child-care center that:
1. Affects a child or staff person; or
2. Includes the center’s discontinuation or disqualification from a governmental assistance
program due to fraud, abuse, or criminal conviction related to that program;
(d) An incident involving fire or other emergency, including a vehicular accident when the
center is transporting a child receiving child care services;
(e) A report of child abuse or neglect that:
1. Has been accepted by the cabinet in accordance with 922 KAR 1:330; and
2. Names a director, employee, volunteer, or person with supervisory or disciplinary control
over, or having unsupervised contact with a child in care as the alleged perpetrator; or
(f) An individual specified in Section 6(4) of this administrative regulation meeting a disquali-
fying criterion or background check result pursuant to 922 KAR 2:280.
(2) An incident of child abuse or neglect shall be reported to the cabinet pursuant to KRS
620.030.
(3) A licensee shall report to the cabinet within one (1) week:
(a) Any resignation, termination, or change of director; and
(b) The name of the acting director who satisfies the requirements of Section 10 of this ad-
ministrative regulation.
(4)(a) Written notification of the following shall be:
1. Made to the cabinet, in writing, to allow for approval before implementation: a. Change of ownership;
b. Change of location;
c. Increase in capacity;
Legislative Research Commission PDF Version
Page: 11

d. Change in hours of operation;
e. Change of services in the following categories:
(i) Infant;
(ii) Toddler;
(iii) Preschool-age;
(iv) School-age;
(v) Nontraditional hours; or
(vi) Transportation; or
f. Addition to or reduction of the square footage of a child-care center’s premises; and
2. Signed by each owner listed on the preliminary or regular license.
(b) The cabinet or its designee shall not charge a fee for acting upon reported changes.
(5) The death of a child in care shall be reported to the cabinet within one (1) hour.
(6) The cabinet and the parent of a child enrolled in a child-care center shall receive notice
as soon as practicable, and prior to, a child-care center’s temporary or permanent closure.
Section 13. Annual Renewal. (1)(a) A regular license shall expire one (1) year from the ef- fective date or last renewal date unless the licensee renews the regular license in accordance with this section and KRS 199.896(3).
(b) A preliminary license shall expire six (6) months from the date of issuance.
(c) A regular license that expires shall lapse and shall not be subject to appeal.
(2) A licensee seeking renewal of a regular license shall:
(a) Submit one (1) month prior to the anniversary of the regular license’s effective date, an
OIG-DRCC-06, Child-Care Center License Renewal Form;
(b) Meet the requirements specified in Sections 4 through 12 of this administrative regula-
tion; and
(c) Pay the nonrefundable renewal fee in accordance with Section 7 of this administrative
regulation.
(3) If requirements of subsection (1) of this section are met, the cabinet shall renew the li-
cense in the form of a validation letter.
(4) An application for renewal shall be denied in accordance with Section 16 of this adminis-
trative regulation.
Section 14. Statement of Deficiency and Corrective Action Plans. (1) If a center is found not to be in regulatory compliance, the cabinet or its designee shall complete a written statement of deficiency in accordance with KRS 199.896(5).
(2) Except for a violation posing an immediate threat as handled in accordance with KRS 199.896(5)(c), a child-care center shall submit a written corrective action plan to the cabinet or its designee within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date of the statement of deficiency to elim- inate or correct the regulatory violation.
(3) A corrective action plan shall include:
(a) Specific action undertaken to correct a violation;
(b) The date action was or shall be completed;
(c) Action utilized to assure ongoing compliance;
(d) Supplemental documentation requested as a part of the plan; and
(e) Signature of the licensee or designated representative of the licensee and the date of
signature.
(4) The cabinet or its designee shall review the plan and notify the child-care center within
thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the plan, in writing, of the decision to: (a) Accept the plan;
Legislative Research Commission PDF Version Page: 12

(b) Not accept the plan; or
(c) Deny, suspend, or revoke the child-care center's license, in accordance with Section 16 of this administrative regulation.
(5) A notice of unacceptability shall state the specific reasons the plan is unacceptable. (6) A child-care center notified of the unacceptability of its plan shall:
(a) Within fifteen calendar days of the notification’s date, submit an amended plan; or (b) Have its license revoked or denied for failure to:
1. Submit an acceptable amended plan in accordance with KRS 199.896(4); or
2. Implement the corrective measures identified in the plan of correction.
(7) The cabinet shall not review or accept more than three (3) corrective action plans from a
licensed child-care center in response to the same written statement of deficiency.
(8) If a licensed child-care center fails to submit an acceptable corrective action plan or does not implement corrective measures in accordance with the corrective action plan, the cabinet
shall deny or revoke the center’s license.
(9) The administrative regulatory violation reported on a statement of deficiency that poses
an immediate threat to the health, safety, or welfare of a child shall be corrected within five (5) working days from the date of the statement of deficiency in accordance with KRS 199.896(5)(c).
Section 15. Directed Plan of Correction (DPOC). If the cabinet determines that a child-care center is in violation of this administrative regulation, 922 KAR 2:120, or 922 KAR 2:280, based on the severity of the violation, the cabinet:
(1) Shall enter into an agreement with the provider detailing the requirements for remedying a violation and achieving compliance;
(2) Shall notify or require the provider to notify a parent of a child who may be affected by the situation for which a DPOC has been imposed;
(3) Shall increase the frequency of monitoring by cabinet staff;
(4) May require the provider to participate in additional training; and
(5) May amend the agreement with the provider if the cabinet identifies an additional viola-
tion during the DPOC.
Section 16. Basis for Denial, Suspension or Revocation. (1)(a) The cabinet shall deny, sus- pend, or revoke a preliminary or regular license in accordance with KRS 199.896 if the appli- cant for licensure, director, employee, or a person who has supervisory authority over, or un- supervised contact with, a child fails to meet the requirements of this administrative regulation, 922 KAR 2:120, 922 KAR 2:280, or 922 KAR 2:190.
(b) A licensee whose regular license is suspended or revoked shall:
1. Receive a new license certificate indicating that the license is under adverse action; and 2. Post the new license certificate in accordance with Section 8(6) of this administrative reg-
ulation.
(2) Emergency Action.
(a) The cabinet shall take emergency action in accordance with KRS 199.896(4) by issuing
an emergency order that suspends a child-care center’s license.
(b) An emergency order shall:
1. Be served to a licensed child-care center in accordance with KRS 13B.050(2); and
2. Specify the regulatory violation that caused the emergency condition to exist.
(c) Upon receipt of an emergency order, a child-care center shall surrender its license to the
cabinet.
(d) The cabinet or its designee and the child-care center shall make reasonable efforts to:
Legislative Research Commission PDF Version Page: 13

1. Notify a parent of each child in care of the center’s suspension; and
2. Refer a parent for assistance in locating alternate child care arrangements.
(e) A child-care center required to comply with an emergency order issued in accordance
with this subsection may submit a written request for an emergency hearing within twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of the order to determine the propriety of the licensure’s suspension in accordance with KRS 199.896(7).
(f) The cabinet shall conduct an emergency hearing within ten (10) working days of the re- quest for hearing in accordance with KRS 13B.125(3).
(g)1. Within five (5) working days of completion of the hearing, the cabinet’s hearing officer shall render a written decision affirming, modifying, or revoking the emergency order to sus- pend licensure.
2. The emergency order shall be affirmed if there is substantial evidence of an immediate threat to public health, safety, or welfare.
(h) A provider's license shall be revoked if the:
1. Provider does not request a hearing within the timeframes established in paragraph (e) of this subsection; or
2. Condition that resulted in the emergency order is not corrected within thirty (30) calendar days of service of the emergency order.
(3) Public information shall be provided in accordance with KRS 199.896(10) and (11), and 199.898(2)(d) and (e).
(4) Unless an applicant for a license meets requirements of Section 6(5) of this administra- tive regulation, the cabinet shall deny an applicant for a preliminary or regular license if:
(a) The applicant has had previous ownership interest in a child-care provider that had its certification, license, or registration denied or revoked;
(b) Denial, investigation, or revocation proceedings were initiated, and the licensee voluntar- ily relinquished the license;
(c) An appeal of a denial or revocation is pending;
(d) The applicant previously failed to comply with the requirements of KRS 199.896, 922 KAR 2:120, 922 KAR 2:280, 922 KAR 2:190, this administrative regulation, or another adminis- trative regulation effective at the time;
(e) An individual with ownership interest in the child-care center has been discontinued or disqualified from participation in:
1. The Child Care Assistance Program established by 922 KAR 2:160, including an inten- tional program violation in accordance with 922 KAR 2:020; or
2. Another governmental assistance program due to fraud, abuse, or criminal conviction re- lated to that program;
(f) The applicant is the parent, spouse, sibling, or child of a previous licensee whose license was denied, revoked, or voluntarily relinquished as described in paragraphs (a) through (d) of this subsection, and the previous licensee will be involved in the child-care center in any ca- pacity;
(g) The applicant listed as an officer, director, incorporator, or organizer of a corporation or limited liability company whose child-care center license was denied, revoked, or voluntarily re- linquished as described in paragraph (a) through (d) of this subsection within the past seven (7) years;
(h) The applicant knowingly misrepresents or submits false information on a form required by the cabinet;
(i) The applicant interferes with a cabinet or other agency representative’s ability to perform an official duty pursuant to Section 6(8)(f) or 6(9) of this administrative regulation;
(j) The applicant’s background check reveals that the applicant is disqualified in accordance
Legislative Research Commission PDF Version Page: 14

with 922 KAR 2:280;
(k) The applicant has been the subject of more than two (2) directed plans of correction dur-
ing a three (3) year period; or
(l) The applicant has failed to comply with payment provisions in accordance with 922 KAR
2:190.
(5) A child-care center’s license shall be revoked if:
(a) A representative of the center interferes with a cabinet or other agency representative’s
ability to perform an official duty pursuant to Section 6(8)(f) or 6(9) of this administrative regula- tion;
(b) A cabinet representative, a representative from another agency with regulatory authority, or parent is denied access during operating hours to:
1. A child;
2. The child-care center; or
3. Child-care center staff;
(c) The licensee is discontinued or disqualified from participation in:
1. The Child Care Assistance Program as a result of an intentional program violation in ac-
cordance with 922 KAR 2:020; or
2. A governmental assistance program as a result of fraud, abuse, or criminal conviction re-
lated to that program;
(d) The licensee fails to meet a condition of, or violates a requirement of a directed plan of
correction pursuant to Section 15 of this administrative regulation;
(e) The applicant or licensee knowingly misrepresents or submits false information on a
form required by the cabinet;
(f) The licensee is the subject of more than two (2) directed plans of correction during a
three (3) year period; or
(g) The licensee has failed to comply with payment provisions in accordance with 922 KAR
2:190.
(6) The cabinet or its designee shall suspend the license if:
(a) A regulatory violation is found to pose an immediate threat to the health, safety, and wel-
fare of the children in care as described in KRS 199.896(4); or
(b) The child care-center fails to comply with the approved plan of correction.
Section 17. Civil Penalty. The cabinet shall assess and enforce a civil penalty in accordance with 922 KAR 2:190.
Section 18. Right of Appeal. (1) If an application has been denied or a licensee receives no- tice of suspension, revocation, or civil penalty, the cabinet shall inform the applicant for licen- sure or licensee by written notification of the right to appeal the notice of adverse action in ac- cordance with KRS Chapter 13B and 199.896(7).
(2) An adverse action may be appealed by filing form OIG-DRCC-02, Licensed Request for Appeal or Informal Dispute Resolution. The request shall:
(a) Be submitted to the secretary of the cabinet or designee within twenty (20) calendar days of the notice of adverse action; and
(b) Specify if an applicant for licensure or licensee requests an opportunity to informally dis- pute the notice of adverse action.
(3) If an applicant for licensure or a licensee files an OIG-DRCC-02 for a hearing, the cabi- net shall:
(a) Appoint a hearing officer; and
(b) Proceed pursuant to KRS 13B.050.
Legislative Research Commission PDF Version Page: 15

(4) If an applicant for licensure or a licensee files a request for a hearing and a request for an informal dispute resolution, the cabinet shall:
(a) Abate the formal hearing pending completion of the informal dispute resolution process; and
(b) Proceed to informal dispute resolution.
Section 19. Informal Dispute Resolution. (1) A request for informal dispute resolution shall: (a) Accompany the request for a hearing;
(b) Identify the licensure deficiency in dispute;
(c) Specify the reason the applicant for licensure or licensee disagrees with the deficiency;
and
(d) Include documentation that disputes the deficiency.
(2) Upon receipt of the written request for informal dispute resolution, the regional program
manager or designee shall:
(a) Review documentation submitted by the applicant for licensure or licensee; and
(b) If requested, schedule an informal dispute resolution meeting with the applicant for li-
censure or licensee.
(3) The informal dispute resolution meeting shall be held within ten (10) calendar days of re-
ceipt of the request by the cabinet, unless both parties agree in writing to an extension of time. (4) The informal dispute resolution meeting shall be conducted by:
(a) The regional program manager or designee; and
(b) A child care surveyor who did not participate in the survey resulting in the disputed defi-
ciency.
(5) Within ten (10) calendar days of completion of the informal dispute resolution meeting or
request, the regional program manager or designee shall:
(a) Issue a decision by written notification to the return address specified in the request for
informal dispute resolution;
(b) If a change is made to the statement of deficiencies, issue an amended statement of de-
ficiencies; and
(c) Specify whether the adverse action has been rescinded.
(6) An applicant or a licensee may:
(a) Accept the determination; or
(b) Proceed to a hearing according to KRS 13B.050.
(7) A request for informal dispute resolution shall not:
(a) Limit, modify, or suspend enforcement action against the applicant for licensure or licen-
see; or
(b) Delay submission of a written plan of correction.
(8) Emergency action taken in accordance with Section 16(2) of this administrative regula-
tion shall conform to the requirements of KRS 199.896(4). The informal dispute resolution pro- cess shall not restrict the cabinet's ability to issue an emergency order to stop, prevent, or avoid an immediate threat to public health, safety, or welfare under KRS 13B.125(2) and 199.896(4).
Section 20. Incorporation by Reference. (1) The following material is incorporated by refer- ence:
(a) "OIG-DRCC-01, Initial Child-Care Center License Application", 8/2018;
(b) "OIG-DRCC-02, Licensed Request for Appeal or Informal Dispute Resolution", 8/3/12; and
(c) "OIG-DRCC-06, Child-Care Center License Renewal Form", 8/2018.
Legislative Research Commission PDF Version Page: 16

(2) This material may be inspected, copied, or obtained, subject to applicable copyright law, at the Inspector General's Office, 275 East Main Street, Frankfort, Kentucky 40621, Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. (20 Ky.R. 251; Am. 555; 805; eff. 10-13-1993; Recodified from 905 KAR 2:090, 7-8-1999; 26 Ky.R. 1261; 1577; eff. 2-1-2000; 27 Ky.R. 1639; 2178; eff. 2-1-2001; 28 Ky.R. 2107; 2614; eff. 6-14-2002; 34 Ky.R. 1243; 2156; eff. 3-19-2008; 39 Ky.R. 878; 1708; eff. 3-8-2013; 39 Ky.R. 2236; eff. 9-18-2013; TAm eff. 10-4-2013 – Amd 44 Ky.R. 2109, 2513; eff. 7-18-2018.)
Legislative Research Commission PDF Version Page: 17

