R430 Health, Family Health and Preparedness, Child Care Licensing R430-90 Licensed Family Child Care
R430-90-1 Legal Authority and Purpose
(1) ThisruleisenactedandenforcedinaccordancewithUtahCode, Title 26, Chapter 39.
(2) This rule establishes the foundational standards necessary to protect the health and safety of children in residential child care facilities and defines the general procedures and requirements to obtain and maintain a license to provide child care.
R430-90-2 Definitions
(1) "Applicant" means a person or business who has applied for a new or a renewal of a license, certificate, or exemption from Child Care Licensing.
(2) "ASTM" means American Society for Testing and Materials.
(3) "Background Finding" means information in a background check
that may result in a denial from Child Care Licensing.
(4) "Background Check Denial" means that an individual has failed the background check and is prohibited from being involved with
a child care program.
(5) "Barrier" means an enclosing structure such as a fence, wall,
bars, railing, or solid panel to prevent accidental or deliberate
movement through or access to something.
(6) "Body Fluid" means blood, urine, feces, vomit, mucus, and/or
saliva.
(7) "BusinessDays/Hours"meansthedaysoftheweekandtimesthe
facility is open for business.
(8) "Capacity" means the maximum number of children for whom care
can be provided at any given time.
(9) "Caregiver-to-Child Ratio" means the number of caregivers
responsible for a specific number of children.
(10) "CCL" means the Child Care Licensing Program in the Department of Health that is delegated with the responsibility to enforce
the Utah Child Care Licensing Act.
(11) "Child Care" means continuous care and supervision of 5 or more
qualifying children that is:
(a) in place of care ordinarily provided by a parent in the
parent's home,
(b) for less than 24 hours a day, and (c) for direct or indirect compensation.
(12) "Child Care Center Licensing Committee" means the Child Care Center Licensing Committee created in the Utah Child Care Licensing Act.
(13) "Child Care Program" means a person or business that offers child care.
(14) "Choking Hazard" means an object or a removable part on an object with a diameter of less than 1-1/4 inch and a length of less than 2-1/4 inches that could be caught in a child's throat blocking their airway and making it difficult or impossible to breathe.

(15) "Conditional Status" means that the provider is at risk of losing their child care license because compliance with licensing rules has not been maintained.
(16) "Covered Individual" means any of the following individuals involved with a child care facility:
(a) an owner;
(b) an employee;
(c) a caregiver;
(d) a volunteer, except a parent of a child enrolled in the
child care program;
(e) an individual age 12 years or older who resides in the
facility; and
(f) anyonewhohasunsupervisedcontactwithachildincare.
(17) "CPSC" means the Consumer Product Safety Commission.
(18) "Department" means the Utah Department of Health.
(19) "Designated Play Surface" means any accessible elevated surface
for standing, walking, crawling, sitting or climbing; or an accessible flat surface at least 2 by 2 inches in size and having an angle less than 30 degrees from horizontal.
(20) "Emotional Abuse" means behavior that could harm a child's emotional development, such as threatening, intimidating, humiliating, demeaning, criticizing, rejecting, using profane language, and/or using inappropriate physical restraint.
(21) "Entrapment Hazard" means an opening greater than 3-1/2 by 6-1/4 inches and less than 9 inches in diameter where a child's body could fit through but the child's head could not fit through, potentially causing a child's entrapment and strangulation.
(22) "Facility" means a child care program or the premises approved by the Department to be used for child care.
(23) "Group" means the children who are supervised by one or more caregivers in an individual room or in an area within a room that is defined by furniture or other partition.
(24) "Group Size" means the number of children in a group.
(25) "Guest" means an individual who is not a covered individual and is at the child care facility with the provider's permission.
(26) "Health Care Provider" means a licensed health professional, such as a physician, dentist, nurse practitioner, or physician's assistant.
(27) "Homeless" means anyone who lacks a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residence as described in the McKinney-Vento Act. McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (Title IX, Part A of ESSA)
(28) "Inaccessible" means out of reach of children by being:
(a) locked, such as in a locked room, cupboard, or drawer; (b) securedwithachildsafetydevice,suchasachildsafety
cupboard lock or doorknob device;
(c) behind a properly secured child safety gate;
(d) located in a cupboard or on a shelf that is at least 36
inches above the floor; or
(e) in a bathroom, at least 36 inches above any surface from
where a child could stand or climb.
(29) "Infant" means a child who is younger than 12 months of age.
(30) "Infectious Disease" means an illness that is capable of being
spread from one person to another.

(31) "Involved with Child Care" means to do any of the following at or for a child care program licensed by the Department:
(a) provide child care;
(b) volunteer at a child care program;
(c) own,operate,direct,orbeemployedatachildcareprogram; (d) reside at a facility where child care is provided; or (e) bepresentatafacilitywhilecareisbeingprovided,except
for authorized guests or parents who are dropping off a child, picking up a child, or attending a scheduled event at the child care facility.
(32) "License" means a license issued by the Department to provide child care services.
(33) "Licensee" means the legally responsible person or business that holds a valid license from Child Care Licensing.
(34) "LIS Supported Finding" means background check information from the Licensing Information System (LIS) database for child abuse and neglect, maintained by the Utah Department of Human Services.
(35) "McKinney-Vento Act" means a federal law that requires protections and services for children and youth who are homeless including those with disabilities. McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (Title IX, Part A of ESSA)
(36) "Over-the-Counter Medication" means medication that can be purchased without a written prescription including herbal remedies, vitamins, and mineral supplements.
(37) "Parent" means the parent or legal guardian of a child in care.
(38) "Person" means an individual or a business entity.
(39) "Physical Abuse" means causing nonaccidental physical harm to
a child.
(40) "Preschooler" means a child age 2 through 4 years old.
(41) "Provider" means the legally responsible person or business that
holds a valid license from Child Care Licensing. (42) "Qualifying Child" means:
(a) a child who is younger than 13 years old and is the child of a person other than the child care provider or caregiver, (b) achildwithadisabilitywhoisyoungerthan18yearsold
and is the child of a person other than the provider or
caregiver, or
(c) a child who is younger than 4 years old and is the child
of the provider or a caregiver.
(43) "Residential Child Care" means care that takes place in a child
care provider's home.
(44) "Related Child" means a child for whom a provider is the parent,
legal guardian, step-parent, grandparent, step-grandparent, great-grandparent, sibling, step-sibling, aunt, step-aunt, great-aunt, uncle, step-uncle, or great-uncle.
(45) "Sanitize" means to use a chemical product to remove soil and bacteria from a surface or object.
(46) "School-Age Child" means a child age 5 through 12 years old.
(47) "Sexual Abuse" means abuse as defined in Utah Code, Title
76-5-404(1).
(48) "Sexually Explicit Material" means any depiction of sexually
explicit conduct as defined in Utah Code, Title 76-5b-103(10). (49) "Sleeping Equipment" means a cot, mat, crib, bassinet,
porta-crib, playpen, or bed.

(50) "Stationary Play Equipment" means equipment such as a climber, slide, swing, merry-go-round, or spring rocker that is meant to stay in one location when a child uses it. Stationary play equipment does not include:
(a) a sandbox;
(b) a stationary circular tricycle;
(c) a sensory table; or
(d) a playhouse that sits on the ground or floor and has no
attached equipment, such as a slide, swing, or climber. (51) "StrangulationHazard"meanssomethingonwhichachild'sclothes or drawstrings could become caught, or something in which a child
could become entangled such as:
(a) aprotrudingboltendthatextendsmorethan2threadsbeyond
the face of the nut;
(b) hardwarethatformsahookorleavesagaporspacebetween
components such as a protruding S-hook; or
(c) arope,cord,orchainthatisattachedtoastructureand
is long enough to encircle a child's neck.
(52) "Substitute" means a person who assumes a caregiver's duties
when the caregiver is not present.
(53) "Toddler" means a child aged 12 through 23 months.
(54) "Unrelated Child" means a child who is not a "related child"
as defined in R381-100-2(46).
(55) "Unsupervised Contact" means being with, caring for,
communicating with, or touching a child in the absence of a caregiver or other employee who is at least 18 years old and has passed a Child Care Licensing background check.
(55) "UseZone"meanstheareabeneathandsurroundingaplaystructure or piece of equipment that is designated for unrestricted movement around the equipment, and onto which a child falling from or exiting the equipment could be expected to land.
(57) "Volunteer" means an individual who receives no form of direct or indirect compensation for their service.
(58) "Working Days" means the days of the week the Department is open for business.
R430-90-3 License Required
(1) A person or persons shall be licensed under this rule if they provide child care:
(a) in the home where they reside;
(b) in the absence of the child's parent;
(c) for 5 to 16 unrelated children;
(d) for 4 or more hours per day;
(e) on a regularly scheduled, ongoing basis; and (f) for direct or indirect compensation.
(2) TheDepartmentmaynotlicense,norisalicenserequiredfor: (a) a person who cares for related children only; or
(b) a person who provides care on a sporadic basis only.
(3) According to Foster Care Services rule R501-12-4(8)(f), a provider may not be licensed to provide child care in a facility that is also licensed to offer foster or respite care services, or another licensed or certified human services program.

R430-90-4 License Application, Renewal, Changes, and Variances
(1) An applicant for a new child care license shall submit to the Department:
(a) an online application;
(b) a copy of a current local fire clearance or a statement
from the local fire authority that a fire inspection is
not required;
(c) a copy of a current local health department kitchen
clearance for a facility providing food service or a statement from the local health department that a kitchen inspection is not required;
(d) acopyofacurrentlocalbusinesslicenseorastatement from the city that a business license is not required;
(e) a copy of a completed Department health and safety plan form;
(f) CCL background screenings for all covered individuals as required in R430-90-8;
(g) a current copy of the Department's new provider training certificate of attendance;
(h) all required fees, which are nonrefundable; and
(i) asignedAffidavitofLawfulPresenceformprovidedbythe
Department.
(2) The applicant shall pass a Department's inspection of the
facility before a new license or a renewal is issued.
(3) If the local fire authority states that a fire inspection is
not required, a Department's CCL inspection for a new license or a renewal of a license shall include compliance with the following:
(a) addressnumbersand/orlettersshallbereadablefromthe
street;
(b) addressnumbersand/orlettersshallbeatleast4inches
in height and 1/2 inch thick;
(c) exit doors shall operate properly and shall be well
maintained;
(d) obstructions in exits, aisles, corridors, and stairways
shall be removed;
(e) there shall be unobstructed fire extinguishers that are
of an X minimum rate and appropriate to the type of hazard, currently charged and serviced, and mounted not more than 5 feet above the floor;
(f) there shall be working smoke detectors that are properly installed on each level of the building; and
(g) boiler, mechanical, and electrical panel rooms shall not be used for storage.
(4) Ifthelocalhealthdepartmentstatesthatakitcheninspection is not required, a Department's CCL inspection for a new license or a renewal of a license shall include compliance with the following:
(a) therefrigeratorshallbeclean,ingoodrepair,andworking at or below 41 degrees Fahrenheit;
(b) thereshallbeaworkingthermometerintherefrigerator;
(c) thereshallbeaworkingstemthermometeravailabletocheck
cook and hot hold temperatures;

(d) cooksshallhaveacurrentfoodhandler'spermitavailable on-site for review by the Department;
(e) reusable food holders, utensils, and food preparation surfaces shall be washed, rinsed, and sanitized with an approved sanitizer before each use;
(f) chemicalsshallbestoredawayfromfoodandfoodservice items;
(g) food shall be properly stored, kept to the proper temperature, and in good condition; and
(h) thereshallbeaworkinghandwashingsinkinthekitchen. (5) Iftheapplicantdoesnotcompletetheapplicationprocesswithin
6 months of first submitting any portion of the application, the Department may deny the application and to be licensed, the applicant shall reapply. This includes resubmitting all required documentation, repaying licensing fees, and passing another inspection of the facility.
(6) TheDepartmentmaydenyanapplicationforalicenseif,within the 5 years preceding the application date, the applicant held a license or a certificate that was:
(a) closed under an immediate closure;
(b) revoked;
(c) closedasaresultofasettlementagreementresultingfrom
a notice of intent to revoke, a notice of revocation, or
a notice of immediate closure;
(d) voluntarilyclosedafteraninspectionofthefacilityfound
rule violations that would have resulted in a notice of intent to revoke or a notice of revocation had the provider not closed voluntarily; or
(e) voluntarily closed having unpaid fees or civil money penalties issued by the Department.
(7) Eachchildcarelicenseexpiresatmidnightonthelastdayof the month shown on the license, unless the license was previously revoked by the Department, or voluntarily closed by the provider.
(8) Within 30 to 90 days before a current license expires, the provider shall submit for renewal:
(a) an online renewal request,
(b) applicable renewal fees,
(c) any previous unpaid fees,
(d) a copy of a current business license,
(e) a copy of a current fire inspection report, and (f) a copy of a current kitchen inspection report.
(9) A provider who fails to renew their license by the expiration date may have an additional 30 days to complete the renewal process if they pay a late fee.
(10) The Department may not renew a license for a provider who is no longer caring for children.
(11) The provider shall submit a complete application for a new license at least 30 days before a change of the child care facility's location.

(12) The provider shall submit a complete application to amend an existing license at least 30 days before any of the following changes:
(a) an increase or decrease of licensed capacity, including
any change to the amount of usable indoor or outdoor space
where child care is provided;
(b) a change in the name of the program;
(c) a change in the regulation category of the program;
(d) a change in the name of the provider; or
(e) atransferofbusinessownershiptoaspouseortoanyother
household member.
(13) The Department may amend a license after verifying that the
applicant is in compliance with all applicable rules and required feeshavebeenpaid. Theexpirationdateoftheamendedlicense remains the same as the previous license.
(14) A license is not assignable or transferable and shall only be amended by the Department.
(15) If an applicant or provider cannot comply with a rule but can meet the intent of the rule in another way, they may apply for a variance to that rule by submitting a request to the Department.
(16) The Department may:
(a) require additional information before acting on the
variance request, and
(b) impose health and safety requirements as a condition of
granting a variance.
(17) The provider shall comply with the existing rule until a variance
is approved.
(18) If a variance is approved, the provider shall keep a copy of
the written approval on-site for review by parents and the
Department.
(19) The Department may grant variances for up to 12 months.
(20) The Department may revoke a variance if:
(a) theproviderisnotmeetingtheintentoftheruleasstated in their approved variance;
(b) the provider fails to comply with the conditions of the variance; or
(c) a change in statute, rule, or case law affects the basis for the variance.
R430-90-5 Rule Violations and Penalties
(1) The Department may place a program's child care license on a conditional status for the following causes:
(a) chronic, ongoing noncompliance with rules;
(b) unpaid fees; or
(c) aseriousruleviolationthatplaceschildren'shealthor safety in immediate jeopardy.
(2) The Department shall establish the length of the conditional status and set the conditions that the child care provider shall satisfy to remove the conditional status.
(3) The Department may increase monitoring of the program that is on conditional status to verify compliance with rules.

(4) The Department may deny or revoke a license if the child care provider:
(a) fails to meet the conditions of a license on conditional status;
(b) violates the Child Care Licensing Act;
(c) providesfalseormisleadinginformationtotheDepartment;
(d) misrepresents information by intentionally altering a
license or any other document issued by the Department; (e) refuses to allow authorized representatives of the
Department access to the facility to ensure compliance with
rules;
(f) refusestosubmitormakeavailabletotheDepartmentany
written documentation required to verify compliance with
rules;
(g) commitsaseriousruleviolationthatresultsindeathor
serious harm to a child, or that places a child at risk
of death or serious harm; or
(h) has committed an illegal act that would exclude a person
from having a license.
(5) Within 10 working days of receipt of a revocation notice, the
provider shall submit to the Department the names and mailing addresses of the parents of each enrolled child so the Department can notify the parents of the revocation.
(6) The Department may order the immediate closure of a facility if conditions create a clear and present danger to any child in care and may require immediate action to protect their health or safety.
(7) Uponreceiptofanimmediateclosurenotice,theprovidershall give the Department the names and mailing addresses of the parents of each enrolled child so the Department can notify the parents of the immediate closure.
(8) If there is a severe injury or the death of a child in care, the Department may order the child care provider to suspend services and/or prohibit new enrollments, pending a review by the Child Fatality Review Committee or a determination of the probable cause of death or injury by a medical professional.
(9) Ifapersonisprovidingcareformorethan4unrelatedchildren without the appropriate license, the Department may:
(a) issue a cease and desist order, or
(b) allow the person to continue operation if:
(i) the person was unaware of the need for a license, (ii) conditions do not create a clear and present danger
to the children in care, and
(iii)the person agrees to apply for the appropriate license
within 30 calendar days of notification by the
Department.
(10) If a person providing care without the appropriate license agrees
to apply for a license but does not submit an application and all required application documents within 30 days, the Department may issue a cease and desist order.
(11) A violation of any rule is punishable by an administrative civil money penalty of up to $5,000 per day as provided in Utah Code, Section 26-39-601.

(12) Assessment of any civil money penalty does not prevent the Department from also taking action to deny, place on conditional status, revoke, immediately close, or refuse to renew a license.
(13) Assessment of any administrative civil money penalty under this section does not prevent court-ordered or other equitable remedies.
(14) The Department may deny an application or revoke a license for failure to pay any required fees, including fees for applications, late fees, returned checks, license changes, additional inspections, conditional monitoring inspections, background checks, civil money penalties, and other fees assessed by the Department.
(15) An applicant or provider may appeal any Department decision within 15 working days of being informed in writing of the decision.
R430-90-6 Administration and Children's Records
(1) The provider shall:
(a) be at least 18 years of age;
(b) pass a CCL background check;
(c) demonstrate lawful presence in the United States; (d) complete the new provider training offered by the
Department; and
(e) completeatleast20hoursofchildcaretrainingeachyear,
based on the facility's license date.
(2) Theprovidershallnotengageinorallowconductthatendangers
children in care; or is contrary to the health, morals, welfare,
and safety of the public.
(3) Theprovidershallhaveknowledgeofandcomplywithallfederal,
state, and local laws, ordinances, and rules, and shall be responsible for the operation and management of a child care program.
(4) Theprovidershallcomplywithlicensingrulesatalltimeswhen a child in care is present.
(5) Theprovidershallposttheoriginalchildcarelicenseonthe facility premises in a place readily visible and accessible to the public.
(6) TheprovidershallpostacopyoftheDepartment'sParentGuide at the facility for parent review during business hours, or give each parent a copy of the guide at enrollment.
(7) The provider shall inform parents and the Department of any changes to the program's telephone number and other contact information within 48 hours of the change.
(8) Theprovidershallestablish,follow,andensurethatallstaff and volunteers follow a written health and safety plan that is: (a) completed on the Department's required form;
(b) submitted to the Department for initial approval and any
time changes are made to the plan; (c) reviewed and updated as needed;
(d) signed and dated at least annually; and
(e) availableforreviewbyparents,staff,andtheDepartment
during business hours.

(9) The provider shall:
(a) have liability insurance, or
(b) informparentsinwritingthattheproviderdoesnothave
liability insurance.
(10) The provider shall ensure that each parent completes an admission
and health assessment form for their child before the child is
admitted into the child care program.
(11) The admission and health assessment form shall include the
following information:
(a) child's name;
(b) child's date of birth;
(c) parent's name, address, and phone number, including a
daytime phone number;
(d) names of people authorized by the parent to pick up the
child;
(e) name,address,andphonenumberofapersontobecontacted
in case of an emergency if the provider is unable to contact
the parent;
(f) if available, the name, address, and phone number of an
out-of-area emergency contact person for the child; (g) current emergency medical treatment and emergency
transportation releases with the parent's signature; (h) any known allergies of the child;
(i) any known food sensitivities of the child;
(j) any chronic medical conditions that the child may have; (k) instructions for special or nonroutine daily health care
of the child;
(l) currentongoingmedicationsthatthechildmaybetaking;
and
(m) any other special health instructions for the caregiver.
(12) The admission and health assessment form shall:
(a) bereviewed,updated,andsignedorinitialedbytheparent
at least annually; and
(b) kept on-site for review by the Department.
(13) Before admitting any child younger than 5 years of age into the child care program, including the provider's and employees' own children, the provider shall obtain the following documentation from the child's parent:
(a) current immunizations, as required by Utah law;
(b) a medical schedule to receive required immunizations; (c) a legal exemption; or
(d) a 90-day exemption for children who are homeless.
(14) For each child younger than 5 years of age, including the provider's and employees' own children, the provider shall keep their current immunization records on-site for review by the Department.
(15) The provider shall submit the annual immunization report to the Immunization Program in the Utah Department of Health by the date specified by the Department.
(16) Each child's information shall be kept confidential and shall not be released without written parental permission.

R430-90-7 Personnel and Training Requirements
(1) Theprovidershallensurethatallemployeesandvolunteersare supervised, qualified, and trained to:
(a) meet the needs of the children as required by rule, and (b) be in compliance with all licensing rules.
(2) Each week, the provider shall be present at the home at least 50% of the time that any child is in care; and whenever a child is in care, the provider, a caregiver who is at least 18 years old, or a substitute with authority to act on behalf of the provider shall be present.
(3) Caregivers shall:
(a) be at least 16 years old;
(b) pass a CCL background check;
(c) receive at least 2.5 hours of preservice training before
beginning job duties;
(d) haveknowledgeofandfollowallapplicablelawsandrules;
and
(e) completeatleast20hoursofchildcaretrainingeachyear,
based on the facility's license date. (4) Substitutes shall:
(a) be at least 18 years old;
(b) pass a CCL background check;
(c) be capable of providing care, supervising children, and
handling emergencies in the provider's absence;
(d) receive at least 2.5 hours of preservice training before
beginning job duties; and
(e) completeatleast1.5hoursofchildcaretrainingforeach
month they work 40 hours or more.
(5) All other employees such as drivers, cooks, and clerks shall:
(a) pass a CCL background check,
(b) receive at least 2.5 hours of preservice training before
beginning job duties,
(c) haveknowledgeofandfollowallapplicablelawsandrules,
and
(d) not have unsupervised contact with any child in care if
the employee is younger than 16 years of age. (6) Volunteers shall:
(a) pass a CCL background check, and
(b) not have unsupervised contact with any child in care if
the volunteer is younger than 18 years of age. (7) Guests:
(a) shallnothaveunsupervisedcontactwithanychildincare, and
(b) arenotrequiredtopassaCCLbackgroundcheckwhenthey remain in the home for not more than 2 weeks.
(8) Anyindividualwhostaysinthehomeformorethan2weeksshall be considered a household member and shall be required to pass a CCL background check.
(9) Parents of children in care:
(a) shallnothaveunsupervisedcontactwithanychildincare
except their own, and
(b) do not need a CCL background check unless involved with
child care in the facility.

(10) Household members who are:
(a) 12 to 17 years old shall pass a CCL background check; (b) 18yearsofageoroldershallpassaCCLbackgroundcheck
that includes fingerprints; and
(c) younger than 18 years of age shall not have unsupervised
contact with any child in care including during offsite
activities and transportation.
(11) Individuals who provide IEP or IFSP services such as physical,
occupational, or speech therapists:
(a) are not required to have a CCL background check as long
as the child's parent has given permission for services
to take place at the facility, and
(b) shall provide proper identification before having access
to the facility or a child at the facility.
(12) Members from law enforcement or from Child Protective Services:
(a) are not required to have a CCL background check, and (b) shall provide proper identification before having access
to the facility or a child at the facility. (13) Preservice training shall include the following:
(a) job description and duties;
(b) current Department rule sections R430-90-7 through 24; (c) the Department-approved health and safety plan that
includes preparing for and responding to emergencies; (d) prevention,signsandsymptomsofchildabuseandneglect,
including child sexual abuse, and legal reporting
requirements;
(e) preventionofshakenbabysyndromeandabusiveheadtrauma,
and coping with crying babies;
(f) preventionofsuddeninfantdeathsyndrome(SIDS) andthe
use of safe sleeping practices;
(g) recognizing the signs of homelessness and available
assistance;
(h) a review of the information in each child's health
assessment; and
(i) an introduction and orientation to the children in care.
(14) Documentation of each individual's preservice training shall be kept on-site for review by the Department and include the following:
(a) training topics,
(b) date of the training, and
(c) total hours or minutes of training.
(15) Annual child care training shall include the following topics:
(a) current Department rule sections R430-90-7 through 24; (b) the Department-approved health and safety plan that
includes preparing for and responding to emergencies; (c) the prevention, signs and symptoms of child abuse and
neglect, including child sexual abuse, and legal reporting
requirements;
(d) principlesofchildgrowthanddevelopment,includingbrain
development;
(e) positive guidance and interactions with children;
(f) preventionofshakenbabysyndromeandabusiveheadtrauma,
and coping with crying babies;

(g) preventionofsuddeninfantdeathsyndrome(SIDS)anduse of safe sleeping practices; and
(h) recognizing the signs of homelessness and available assistance.
(16) At least 10 of the 20 hours of annual child care training shall be face-to-face instruction.
(17) Individuals who are required to receive annual child care training and who begin employment partway through the facility's license year shall complete a proportionate number of training hours including the face-to-face instruction.
(18) Documentation of each individual's annual child care training shall be kept on-site for review by the Department and include the following:
(a) training topic,
(b) date of the training,
(c) whetherthetrainingwasface-to-faceornon-face-to-face
instruction,
(d) name of the person or organization that presented the
training, and
(e) total hours or minutes of training.
(19) Whenever there are children present, there shall be at least one caregiver present who can demonstrate English literacy skills needed to care for children and respond to emergencies.
(20) At least one staff member with a current Red Cross, American Heart Association, or equivalent first aid and infant/child CPR certification shall be present when children are in care: (a) at the facility,
(b) in each vehicle transporting children, and
(c) at each offsite activity.
(21) CPR certification shall include hands-on testing.
(22) The following records for each covered individual shall be kept
on-site for review by the Department:
(a) the date of initial employment or association with the
program;
(b) acurrentfirstaidandCPRcertification,ifrequiredin
rule; and
(c) a six-week record of the times worked each day.
R430-90-8 Background Checks
(1) Beforeanewcoveredindividualbecomesinvolvedwithchildcare in the program, the provider shall:
(a) havetheindividualsubmitanonlinebackgroundcheckform, (b) authorize the individual’s background check form,
(c) pay all required fees, and
(d) receivewrittennoticefromCCLthattheindividualpassed
the background check.
(2) Theprovidershallensurethatanonlinebackgroundcheckform
is submitted and authorized, and that background check fees are paid within 10 working days from when a child who resides in the facility turns 12 years old.
(3) TheprovidershallensurethataCCLbackgroundcheckforeach individual age 18 years or older includes fingerprints and fingerprints fees.

(4) The fingerprints shall be prepared by a local law enforcement agency or an agency approved by local law enforcement.
(5) If fingerprints are submitted through Live Scan (electronically), the agency taking the fingerprints shall follow the Department's guidelines.
(6) Fingerprints are not required if the covered individual has: (a) previously submitted fingerprints to CCL for a Next
Generation, national criminal history check;
(b) resided in Utah continuously since the fingerprints were
submitted; and
(c) kept their CCL background check current.
(7) Backgroundchecksarevalidfor1yearandshallberenewedbefore the last day of the month listed on the covered individual's background check card.
(8) At least 2 weeks before the end of the renewal month that is written on a covered individual's background check card, the provider shall:
(a) havetheindividualsubmitanonlineCCLbackgroundcheck
form and fingerprints if not previously submitted,
(b) authorize the individual's background check form through
the provider portal, and (c) pay all required fees.
(9) Thefollowingbackgroundfindingsshalldenyacoveredindividual from being involved with child care:
(a) LIS supported findings,
(b) theindividual'snameappearsontheUtahornationalsex
offender registry,
(c) any felony convictions,
(d) any Misdemeanor A convictions, or
(e) MisdemeanorBandCconvictionsforthereasonslistedin
R430-90-8(10).
(10) The following convictions, regardless of severity, may result
in a background check denial:
(a) unlawful sale or furnishing alcohol to minors;
(b) sexual enticing of a minor;
(c) cruelty to animals, including dogfighting;
(d) bestiality;
(e) lewdness, including lewdness involving a child;
(f) voyeurism;
(g) providing dangerous weapons to a minor;
(h) a parent providing a firearm to a violent minor;
(i) a parent knowing of a minor's possession of a dangerous
weapon;
(j) sales of firearms to juveniles;
(k) pornographic material or performance;
(l) sexual solicitation;
(m) prostitution and related crimes;
(n) contributing to the delinquency of a minor;
(o) any crime against a person;
(p) a sexual exploitation act;
(q) leaving a child unattended in a vehicle; and
(r) drivingundertheinfluence(DUI)whileachildispresent
in the vehicle.

(11) A covered individual with a Class A misdemeanor background finding not listed in R430-90-8(10) may be involved with child care when:
(a) 10ormoreyearshavepassedsincetheClassAmisdemeanor
offense, and
(b) thereisnootherconvictionfortheindividualinthepast
10 years.
(12) A covered individual with a Class A misdemeanor background
finding not listed in R430-90-8(10) may be involved with child care for up to 6 months if:
(a) 5 to 9 years have passed since the offense,
(b) thereisnootherconvictionsincetheClassAmisdemeanor
offense,
(c) the individual provides to the Department documentation
of an active petition for expungement, and
(d) the provider ensures that the individual does not have
unsupervised contact with any child in care.
(13) If a petition for expungement is denied, the covered individual
shall no longer be involved with child care.
(14) A covered individual shall not be denied if the only background
finding is a conviction or plea of no contest to a nonviolent drug offense that occurred 10 or more years before the CCL background check was conducted.
(15) The Department may rely on the criminal background check findings as conclusive evidence of the arrest warrant, arrest, charge, or conviction; and the Department may revoke, suspend, or deny a license or employment based on that evidence.
(16) If the provider has a background check denial, the Department may suspend or deny their license until the reason for the denial is resolved.
(17) If a covered individual fails to pass a CCL background check, including that the individual has been convicted, has pleaded no contest, or is currently subject to a plea in abeyance or diversion agreement for a felony or misdemeanor, the provider shall prohibit that individual from being employed by the child care program or residing at the facility until the reason for the denial is resolved.
(18) If a covered individual is denied a license or employment based upon the criminal background check and disagrees with the information provided by the Department of Public Safety, the covered individual may appeal the information as provided in Utah Code, Sections 77-18-10 through 77-18-14 and 77-18a-1.
(19) If a covered individual disagrees with a supported finding on the Department of Human Services Licensing Information System (LIS):
(a) theindividualcannotappealthesupportedfindingtothe
Department of Health, and
(b) the covered individual may appeal the finding to the
Department of Human Services and follow the process established by the Department of Human Services.

(20) Within48hoursofbecomingawareofacoveredindividual'sarrest warrant, felony or misdemeanor arrest, charge, conviction, or supported LIS finding, the provider and the covered individual shallnotifytheDepartment. FailuretonotifytheDepartment within 48 hours may result in disciplinary action, including revocation of the license.
(21) The Executive Director of the Department of Health may overturn a background check denial when the Executive Director determines that the nature of the background finding or mitigating circumstances do not pose a risk to children.
R430-90-9 Facility
(1) Thereshallbeatleast35squarefeetofindoorspaceforeach child in care, including the provider's and employees' children. (2) Indoorspaceperchildmayincludefloorspaceusedforfurniture, fixtures, or equipment if the furniture, fixture, or equipment
is used:
(a) by children,
(b) for the care of children, or (c) to store classroom materials.
(3) Thefollowingareasarenotincludedwhenmeasuringindoorspace for children's use:
(a) bathrooms, (b) closets,
(c) hallways, and (d) entryways.
(4) The maximum allowed capacity for a child care facility may be limited by local ordinances.
(5) Thenumberofchildrenincareatanygiventimeshallnotexceed the capacity identified on the license.
(6) The provider shall ensure that any building or play structure on the premises constructed before 1978 that has peeling, flaking, chalking, or failing paint is tested for lead. If lead-based paint is found, the provider shall contact their local health department within 5 working days and follow required procedures for remediation of the lead hazard.
(7) Each room and indoor area that is used by children shall be ventilated by mechanical ventilation, or by windows that open and have screens.
(8) All rooms and areas that are used for child care shall have adequate light intensity for the safety of the children and the type of activity being conducted.
(9) The provider shall maintain the indoor temperature between 65 and 82 degrees Fahrenheit.
(10) There shall be a working telephone in the home, in each vehicle while transporting children, and during offsite activities.
(11) There shall be a working toilet and a working handwashing sink accessible to each nondiapered child in care.
(12) A bathroom that provides privacy shall be available for use by school-age children.
(13) There shall be an outdoor area that is safely accessible to children.
(14) The outdoor area shall have at least 40 square feet of space for each child using the area at one time.

(15) The outdoor area shall be enclosed within a fence, wall, or solid natural barrier that is at least 4 feet high when the facility is on a street or within half a mile of a street that:
(a) has a speed of 25 miles per hour or higher, or
(b) has more than 2 lanes of traffic.
(16) The following hazards shall be separated from the children's
outdoorareawithafence,wall,or solidnaturalbarrierthat is at least 4 feet high:
(a) barbedwirethatiswithin30feetofthechildren'splay
area;
(b) livestock on or within 50 yards of the property line; (c) dangerousmachinery,suchasfarmequipment,onorwithin
50 yards of the property line;
(d) a drop-off of more than 5 feet on or within 50 yards of
the property line; or
(e) awaterhazard,suchasaswimmingpool,pond,ditch,lake,
reservoir, river, stream, creek, or animal watering
trough, on or within 100 yards of the property line. (17) There shall be no gap 5 by 5 inches or greater in or under the
fence.
(18) Whenever there are children in the outdoor area, there shall
be shade available to protect them from excessive sun and heat. (19) If there is a swimming pool on the premises that is not emptied
after each use:
(a) the provider shall meet applicable state and local laws
and ordinances related to the operation of a swimming pool
and maintain the pool in a safe manner; and
(b) whennotinuse,thepoolshallbeenclosedwithinatleast a 4-foot-high fence or solid barrier that is kept locked
and that separates the pool from any other areas on the premises, or enclosed with a locked, properly working safety cover that meets ASTM Specification F1346-91.
(20) A hot tub on the premises with water in it shall be inaccessible to children by being:
(a) kept locked with a properly working cover; or
(b) enclosed within at least a 4-foot-high fence or solid
barrier that is kept locked and that separates the hot tub
from any other areas on the premises.
(21) The provider shall maintain buildings and outdoor areas in good
repair and safe condition including:
(a) ceilings, walls, and floor coverings;
(b) lighting, bathroom, and other fixtures;
(c) draperies, blinds, and other window coverings;
(d) indoor and outdoor play equipment;
(e) furniture,toys,andmaterialsaccessibletothechildren; (f) entrances, exits, steps, and walkways including keeping
them free of ice, snow and other hazards.
(22) Accessible raised decks or balconies that are 5 feet or higher,
and open basement stairwells that are 5 feet or deeper shall have protective barriers that are at least 3 feet high.

(23) If the house is subdivided, any part of the house is rented out, or any other area of the facility is shared including the outdoor area, the entire facility shall be inspected and covered individuals in the facility shall comply with rules, except when all of the following conditions are met:
(a) there is a signed rental/lease agreement between the provider and the individual responsible for or living in the other part of the house;
(b) there is a separate mailing address;
(c) there is a separate entrance for the child care program;
(d) therearenoconnectinginteriordoorwaysthatcanbeused
by unauthorized individuals; and
(e) thereisnosharedaccesstotheoutdoorareausedforchild
care, or a qualified caregiver is present when children are using a shared outdoor area of the facility.
R430-90-10 Ratios and Group Size
(1) The provider shall maintain at least 1 caregiver for up to 8 children in care, and at least 2 caregivers for 9 to 16 children in care.
(2) The provider's or an employee's child age 4 years or older is not counted in the caregiver-to-child ratio when the parent of the child is working at the facility, but the child shall be counted in the group size.
(3) When caring for children younger than 2 years old:
(a) thereshallbenomorethan2childrenyoungerthan2years
old with 1 caregiver;
(b) thereshallbenomorethan4childrenyoungerthan2years
old with 2 caregivers; and
(c) ifthereare6orfewerchildrenincare,theremaybeup
to 3 children younger than 2 years old with 1 caregiver.
(4) The provider shall not exceed the group sizes found in Table
1 and Table 2.
TABLE 1
MAXIMUM GROUP SIZE WITH 1 PROVIDER
# of Provider’s and Caregivers’ Own Children
Ages 4-12 Years Present During Child Care Hours
   Maximum Allowed # of Children in Care, Including the Provider’s and Caregivers’ Own Children Younger than 4 Years Old
 Total # of Children Through age 12 Years Present in the Home During Child Care Hours
     0-4 Children
   8 children
 12 Children
     5 Children
    7 children
  12 Children
        6 Children
  6 children
12 Children
  7 Children
   5 children
 12 Children
     8 Children
    4 children
  12 Children
        9 Children
  3 children
12 Children
  10 Children
   2 children
 12 Children
     11 Children
  1 child
  12 Children
      
TABLE 2
MAXIMUM GROUP SIZE WITH 2 CAREGIVERS
# of Provider’s and Caregivers’ Own Children
Ages 4-12 Years Present During Child Care Hours
   Maximum Allowed # of Children in Care, Including the Provider’s and Caregivers’ Own Children Younger than 4 years old
 Total # of Children Through age 12 Years Present in the Home During Child Care Hours
     0-8 Children
    16 children
  24 Children
        9 Children
  15 children
24 Children
  10 Children
   14 children
 24 Children
     11 Children
    13 children
  24 Children
        12 Children
  12 children
24 Children
  13 Children
   11 children
 24 Children
     14 Children
    10 children
  24 Children
        15 Children
  9 children
24 Children
  16 Children
   8 children
 24 Children
     17 Children
    7 children
  24 Children
        18 Children
  6 children
24 Children
  19 Children
   5 children
 24 Children
     20 Children
    4 children
  24 Children
        21 Children
  3 children
24 Children
  22 Children
   2 children
 24 Children
     23 Children
  1 child
  24 Children
      (5) Caregivers who are 16 or 17 years old may be included in the caregiver-to-child ratio only when there is a caregiver who is at least 18 years on the premises.
(6) Volunteers may be included in the caregiver-to-child ratio if they:
(a) are at least 16 years old,
(b) receive at least 2.5 hours of preservice training before
counting in the caregiver-to-child ratio, and
(c) completeatleast1.5hoursofchildcaretrainingforeach
month they volunteer 40 hours or more.
(7) Guests shall not count in the caregiver-to-child ratio.
R430-90-11 Child Supervision and Security
(1) Theprovidershallensurethatcaregiversprovideandmaintain active supervision of each child at all times:
(a) acaregivershallbeinsidethehomewhenanychildincare
is inside the home,
(b) a caregiver shall be in the outdoor area when any child
younger than 5 years old is in the outdoor area,
(c) caregiversshallknowthenumberofchildrenintheircare
at all times, and
(d) caregivers'attentionshallbefocusedonthechildrenand
not on the caregivers' own personal interests.
(2) Acaregivermayallowonlyschool-agechildrentoplayoutdoors
while the caregiver is indoors when:
(a) thecaregivercanhearthechildrenplayingoutdoors;and (b) the children are in an area completely enclosed within a
fence, wall, or solid natural barrier that is at least a 4 feet high.

(3) A caregiver shall monitor each sleeping infant by:
(a) placingeachinfanttosleepwithinthesightandhearing
of the caregiver, or
(b) personally observing each sleeping infant at least once
every 15 minutes.
(4) Achildmayparticipateinsupervisedoffsiteactivitieswithout
the provider if:
(a) theproviderhaspriorwrittenpermissionfromthechild's
parent for the child's participation, and
(b) the provider has clearly assigned the responsibility for the child's whereabouts and supervision to a responsible adult who accepts that responsibility throughout the period
of the offsite activity.
(5) Wheneverachildisincare,thechild'sparentshallhaveaccess
to their child and the areas used to care for their child. (6) Tomaintainsecurityandsupervisionofchildren,theprovider
shall ensure that:
(a) each child is signed in and out;
(b) only parents or persons with written authorization from
the parent may sign out a child;
(c) photoidentificationisrequirediftheindividualsigning
the child in or out is unknown to the provider;
(d) personssigningchildreninandoutuseidentifiers,such
as a signature, initials, or electronic code;
(e) thesign-inandsign-outrecordsincludethedateandtime
each child arrives and leaves; and
(f) thereiswrittenpermissionfromtheirparentsifschool-age
children sign themselves in and out.
(7) Inanemergency,thecaregivershallaccepttheparent'sverbal
authorization to release a child when the caregiver can confirm the identity of:
(a) the person giving verbal authorization, and
(b) the person picking up the child.
(8) A six-week record of each child's daily attendance, including sign-in and sign-out records, shall be kept on-site for review by the Department.
R430-90-12 Child Guidance and Interaction
(1) Theprovidershallensurethatnochildissubjectedtophysical, emotional, or sexual abuse while in care.
(2) The provider shall inform parents, children, and those who interact with the children of the program's behavioral expectations and how any misbehavior will be handled.
(3) Individualswhointeractwiththechildrenshallguidechildren's behavior by using positive reinforcement, redirection, and by setting clear limits that promote children's ability to become self-disciplined.
(4) Caregivers shall use gentle, passive restraint with children only when it is needed to stop children from injuring themselves or others, or from destroying property.

(5) Interactions with the children shall not include:
(a) anyformofcorporalpunishmentoranyactionthatproduces
physical pain or discomfort such as hitting, spanking,
shaking, biting, or pinching;
(b) restraining a child's movement by binding, tying, or any
other form of restraint that exceeds gentle, passive
restraint;
(c) shouting at children;
(d) any form of emotional abuse;
(e) forcing or withholding food, rest, or toileting; or
(f) confining a child in a closet, locked room, or other
enclosure such as a box, cupboard, or cage.
(6) Any person who witnesses or suspects that a child has been
subjected to abuse, neglect, or exploitation shall immediately notify Child Protective Services or law enforcement as required in Utah Code Section 62A-4a-403 and Section 62A-4a-411.
R430-90-13 Child Safety and Injury Prevention
(1) The building, outdoor area, toys, and equipment shall be used in a safe manner and as intended by the manufacturer to prevent injury to children.
(2) Poisonous and harmful plants shall be inaccessible to children. (3) Sharp objects, edges, corners, or points that could cut or
puncture skin shall be inaccessible to children.
(4) Choking hazards shall be inaccessible to children to children
younger than 3 years of age.
(5) Strangulation hazards such as ropes, cords, chains, and wires
attached to a structure and long enough to encircle a child's
neck shall be inaccessible to children.
(6) Tripping hazards such as unsecured flooring, rugs with curled
edges, or cords in walkways shall be inaccessible to children. (7) For children younger than 5 years of age, empty plastic bags large enough for a child's head to fit inside, latex gloves,
and balloons shall be inaccessible to children.
(8) Standing water that measures 2 inches or deeper and 5 by 5 inches
or greater in diameter shall be inaccessible to children. (9) Toxic or hazardous chemicals such as cleaners, insecticides,
lawn products, and flammable materials shall be:
(a) inaccessible to children,
(b) used according to manufacturer instructions, and (c) stored in containers labeled with their contents.
(10) Items and substances that could burn a child or start a fire shall be inaccessible, such as:
(a) matches or cigarette lighters;
(b) open flames;
(c) hot wax or other substances; and
(d) wheninuse,portablespaceheaters,woodburningstoves,
and fireplaces of all types.
(11) Children shall be protected from items that cause electrical
shock such as:
(a) live electrical wires; and
(b) forchildrenyoungerthan5yearsofage,electricaloutlets
and surge protectors without protective caps or safety devices when not in use.

(12) Unless used and stored in compliance with the Utah Concealed Weapons Act or as otherwise allowed by law, firearms such as guns, muzzles loaders, rifles, shotguns, hand guns, pistols, and automatic guns shall:
(a) belockedinacabinetorareawithakey,combinationlock, or fingerprint lock; and
(b) stored unloaded and separate from ammunition.
(13) Weapons such as paintball guns, BB guns, airsoft guns, sling
shots, arrows, and mace shall be inaccessible to children. (14) Alcohol, illegal substances, and sexually explicit material
shall be inaccessible, and shall not be used on the premises, during offsite activities, or in program vehicles any time a child is in care.
(15) An outdoor source of drinking water, such as individually labeled water bottles, a pitcher of water and individual cups, or a working water fountain shall be available to each child whenever the outside temperature is 75 degrees or higher.
(16) Areas accessible to children shall be free of heavy or unstable objects that children could pull down on themselves, such as furniture, unsecured televisions, and standing ladders.
(17) Hot water accessible to children shall not exceed 120 degrees Fahrenheit.
(18) Highchairs shall have T-shaped safety straps or devices that are used whenever a child is in the chair.
(19) Infant walkers with wheels shall be inaccessible to children.
(20) In compliance with the Utah Indoor Clean Air Act, tobacco,
e-cigarettes, e-juice, e-liquids, and similar products shall be inaccessible and not used:
(a) in the facility or any other building when a child is in
care,
(b) inanyvehiclethatisbeingusedtotransportachildin
care,
(c) within 25 feet of any entrance to the facility or other
building occupied by a child in care, or
(d) inanyoutdoorareaorwithin25feetofanyoutdoorarea
occupied by a child in care.
R430-90-14 Emergency Preparedness and Response
(1) Theprovidershallpostthehome'sstreetaddressandemergency numbers, including ambulance, fire, police, and poison control, near a telephone in the home or in an area clearly visible to anyone needing the information.
(2) Theprovidershallkeepfirst-aidsuppliesinthehome,including at least antiseptic, band-aids, and tweezers.
(3) The provider shall conduct fire evacuation drills quarterly. Drills shall include a complete exit of all children, staff, and volunteers from the home.
(4) The provider shall document each fire drill, including: (a) the date and time of the drill,
(b) the number of children participating,
(c) the total time to complete the evacuation, and (d) any problems encountered.
(5) Theprovidershallconductdrillsfordisastersotherthanfires at least once every 12 months.

(6) A provider shall document each disaster drill, including: (a) thetypeofdisaster,suchasearthquake,flood,prolonged
power outage, or tornado;
(b) the date and time of the drill;
(c) the number of children participating;
(d) the total time to complete the evacuation; and
(e) any problems encountered.
(7) The provider shall vary the days and times on which fire and other disaster drills are held.
(8) Theprovidershallkeepdocumentationoftheprevious12months of quarterly fire drills and annual disaster drills on-site for review by the Department.
(9) In case of an emergency or disaster, the provider and all employees shall follow procedures as outlined in the facility's health and safety plan unless otherwise instructed by emergency personnel.
(10) If the provider must leave the premises due to an emergency, the provider may use an emergency substitute who was not named in the facility's health and safety plan.
(11) The emergency substitute:
(a) shall be at least 18 years old;
(b) is not required to have a CCL background check;
and
(c) is not required to meet the training, first aid, and CPR
requirements of this rule.
(12) Before the provider may leave the children in the care of the
emergency substitute, the provider shall first obtain a signed, written statement from the individual that they:
(a) have not been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor;
(b) do not have a substantiated background finding; and
(c) are not being investigated for abuse or neglect by any federal, state, or local government agency.
(13) The emergency substitute's written background statement shall be submitted to the Department for review within 5 working days after the occurrence.
(14) During the term of the emergency, the emergency substitute may be counted in the caregiver-to-child ratio.
(15) The provider shall make reasonable efforts to minimize the time that the emergency substitute has unsupervised contact with the children in care, and the amount of time shall not be more than 24 hours per emergency incident.
(16) The provider shall give parents a verbal report of every minor incident, accident, or injury involving their child on the day of the occurrence.
(17) The provider shall give parents a written report of every serious incident, accident, or injury involving their child:
(a) The caregivers involved, the provider, and the person
picking up the child shall sign the report on the day of
occurrence.
(b) Ifschool-agechildrensignthemselvesoutofthefacility,
a copy of the report shall be sent to the parent on the day following the occurrence.

(18) If a child is injured and the injury appears serious but not life-threatening, the child's parent shall be contacted immediately.
(19) In the case of a life-threatening injury to a child, or an injury that poses a threat of the loss of vision, hearing, or a limb: (a) emergency personnel shall be called immediately;
(b) afteremergencypersonnelarecalled,thentheparentshall
be contacted;
(c) iftheparentcannotbereached,staffshalltrytocontact
the child's emergency contact person.
(20) If a child is injured while in care and receives medical
attention, or for a child fatality, the provider shall:
(a) submitacompletedaccidentreportformtotheDepartment
within the next business day of the incident; or
(b) contact the Department within the next business day and
submit a completed accident report form within 5 business
days of the incident.
(21) The provider shall keep a six-week record of every serious
incident, accident, and injury report on-site for review by the Department.
R430-90-15 Health and Infection Control
(1) The building, furnishings, equipment, and outdoor area shall be kept clean and sanitary including:
(a) walls,andflooringshallbecleanandfreeofspills,dirt,
and grime;
(b) areasandequipmentusedforthestorage,preparation,and
service of food shall be clean and sanitary;
(c) surfaces used by children shall be free of rotting food
or a build-up of food;
(d) the building and grounds shall be free of a build-up of
litter, trash, and garbage; and
(e) the facility shall be free of animal feces.
(2) Theprovidershalltakesafeandeffectivemeasurestoprevent and eliminate the presence of insects, rodents, and other pests.
(3) All toys and materials including those used by infants and toddlers shall be cleaned:
(a) at least weekly or more often if needed,
(b) afterbeingputinachild'smouthandbeforeanotherchild
plays with the toy, and
(c) after being contaminated by a body fluid.
(4) Fabrictoysanditemssuchasstuffedanimals,clothdolls,pillow covers, and dress-up clothes shall be machine washable and washed weekly, and as needed.
(5) Highchairtraysshallbecleanedandsanitizedbeforeeachuse.
(6) Waterplaytablesortubsshallbecleanedandsanitizeddaily,
if used by the children.
(7) Bathroom surfaces including toilets, sinks, faucets, and
counters shall be cleaned and sanitized each day.
(8) Potty chairs shall be cleaned and sanitized after each use.
(9) Toilet paper shall be accessible to children and kept in a
dispenser.
(10) Onlysingle-usepapertowelsorindividuallylabeledclothtowels
shall be used to dry a child's hands.

(11) If cloth towels are used:
(a) they shall not be shared by children, caregivers, or
volunteers; and
(b) towels shall be washed daily.
(12) Staff and volunteers shall wash their hands thoroughly with soap and running water at required times including:
(a) before handling or preparing food or bottles,
(b) beforeandaftereatingmealsandsnacksorfeedingachild, (c) afterusingthetoiletorhelpingachildusethetoilet, (d) after contact with a body fluid,
(e) when coming in from outdoors, and
(f) after cleaning up or taking out garbage.
(13) Caregivers shall teach children how to wash their hands
thoroughly and shall oversee handwashing whenever possible. (14) The provider shall ensure that children wash their hands thoroughly with soap and running water at required times
including:
(a) before and after eating meals and snacks, (b) after using the toilet,
(c) after contact with a body fluid,
(d) before using a water play table or tub, and (e) when coming in from outdoors.
(15) Personal hygiene items, such as toothbrushes, combs, and hair accessories, shall not be shared and shall be stored so they do not touch each other, or they shall be sanitized between each use.
(16) Pacifiers, bottles, and nondisposable drinking cups shall: (a) be labeled with each child's name or individually
identified; and
(b) not shared, or washed and sanitized before being used by
another child.
(17) A child's clothing shall be promptly changed if the child has
a toileting accident.
(18) If a child's clothing is wet or soiled from a body fluid, the
provider shall ensure that:
(a) the clothing is washed and dried, or
(b) the clothing is placed in a leakproof container that is
labeled with the child's name and returned to the parent. (19) Staff shall take precautions when cleaning floors, furniture,
and other surfaces contaminated by blood, urine, feces, and vomit. Exceptfordiaperchangesandtoiletingaccidents,staff shall:
(a) wear waterproof gloves;
(b) clean the surface using a detergent solution;
(c) rinse the surface with clean water;
(d) sanitize the surface;
(e) throw away in a leakproof plastic bag the disposable
materials, such as paper towels, that were used to clean
up the body fluid;
(f) washandsanitizeanynondisposablematerialsusedtoclean
up the body fluid, such as cleaning cloths, mops, or reusable
rubber gloves, before reusing them; and
(g) wash their hands after cleaning up the body fluid.

(20) A child who becomes ill with an infectious disease while in care shall be made comfortable in a safe, supervised area that is separated from the other children.
(21) If a child becomes ill while in care, the provider shall contact the child's parent as soon as the illness is observed or suspected.
(22) The parents of every child in care shall be informed when any child, employee, or person in the home has an infectious disease orparasite. Parentsshallbenotifiedonthedaytheillness is discovered.
(23) When any child or employee has an infectious disease, an unusual or serious illness, or a sudden onset of an illness, the provider shall notify the local health department on the day the illness is discovered.
R430-90-16 Food and Nutrition
(1) Theprovidershallensurethateachchildage2yearsandolder is offered a meal or snack at least once every 3 hours.
(2) Whenfoodforchildren'smealsand/orsnacksissuppliedbythe provider:
(a) the meal service shall meet local health department food service regulations;
(b) the foods that are served shall meet the nutritional requirements of the USDA Child and Adult Care Food Program (CACFP) whether or not the provider participates in the CACFP;
(c) the provider shall use the CACFP menus, the standard Department-approved menus, or menus approved by a registered dietician. Dietitian approval shall be noted and dated on the menus, and shall be current within the past 5 years;
(d) thecurrentweek'smenushallbepostedforreviewbyparents and the Department; and
(e) providers who are not participating or in good standing with the CACFP shall keep a six-week record of foods served at each meal and snack.
(3) The person who serves food to children shall:
(a) beawareofthechildrenintheirassignedgroupwhohave
food allergies or sensitivities, and
(b) ensurethatthechildrenarenotservedthefoodordrink
they are allergic or sensitive to.
(4) Children'sfoodshallbeservedondishes,napkins,orsanitary
highchair trays, except an individual finger food, such as a cracker, that may be placed directly in a child's hand. Food shall not be placed on a bare table.
(5) Foodanddrinkbroughtinbyparentsfortheirchild'suseshall be:
(a) labeledwiththechild'snameorindividuallyidentified, (b) refrigerated if needed, and
(c) consumed only by that child.

R430-90-17 Medications
(1) All medications shall be inaccessible to children.
(2) Allliquidrefrigeratedmedicationsshallbestoredinaseparate
leakproof container.
(3) All over-the-counter and prescription medications supplied by
parents shall:
(a) be labeled with the child's full name,
(b) be kept in the original or pharmacy container, (c) have the original label, and
(d) have child-safety caps.
(4) The provider shall have a written medication permission form completed and signed by the parent before administering any medication supplied by the parent for their child.
(5) The medication permission form shall include:
(a) the name of the child,
(b) the name of the medication,
(c) written instructions for administration, and (d) the parent signature and the date signed.
(6) Theinstructionsforadministeringthemedicationshallinclude: (a) the dosage,
(b) how the medication will be given,
(c) the times and dates to administer the medication, and (d) the disease or condition being treated.
(7) If the provider supplies an over-the-counter medication for children's use, the medication shall not be administered to any child without previous parental consent for each instance it is given. The consent shall be:
(a) prior written consent; or
(b) verbal consent if the date and time of the consent is
documented, and is signed by the parent upon picking up
their child.
(8) The caregiver administering the medication shall:
(a) wash their hands,
(b) checkthemedicationlabeltoconfirmthechild'snameif
the parent supplied the medication,
(c) check the medication label or the package to ensure that
a child is not given a dosage larger than that recommended
by the health care professional or manufacturer, and (d) administer the medication.
(9) Immediately after administering a medication, the caregiver giving the medication shall record the following information: (a) the date, time, and dosage of the medication given;
(b) any errors in administration or adverse reactions; and (c) their signature or initials.
(10) The provider shall report a child's adverse reaction to a medication or error in administration to the parent immediately upon recognizing the reaction or error, or after notifying emergency personnel if the reaction is life-threatening.
(11) If the provider chooses not to administer medication as instructed by the parent, the provider shall notify the parent of their refusal to administer the medication before the time the medication needs to be given.

(12) The provider shall keep a six-week record of medication permission and administration forms on-site for review by the Department.
(1) The provider shall offer daily activities that support each child's healthy physical, social, emotional, cognitive, and language development.
R430-90-18 Activities
(2) Daily activities shall include outdoor play as weather and air quality allow.
(3) Physicaldevelopmentactivitiesshallincludelight,moderate, and vigorous physical activity for a daily total of at least 15 minutes for every 2 hours children spend in the program.
(4) For children 2 years old and older, the provider shall post a daily schedule that includes:
(a) activities that support children's healthy development;
and
(b) thetimesactivitiesoccurincludingatleastmeal,snack,
nap or rest, and outdoor play times.
(5) Toys, materials, and equipment needed to support children's
healthy development shall be available to the children.
(6) Except for occasional special events, the children's primary
screen time activity on media such as television, cell phones, tablets, and computers shall:
(a) not be allowed for children 0 to 17 months old;
(b) belimitedforchildren18monthsto4yearsoldto1hour
per day, or 5 hours per week with a maximum screen time
of 2 hours per activity; and
(c) be planned to address the needs of children 5 to 12 years
old.
(7) Ifswimmingactivitiesareofferedorifwadingpoolsareused:
(a) theprovidershallobtainparentalpermissionbeforeeach child in care uses the pool;
(b) caregivers shall stay at the pool supervising whenever a child is in the pool or has access to the pool, and whenever a wading pool has water in it;
(c) diapered children shall wear swim diapers whenever they are in the pool;
(d) wading pools shall be emptied and sanitized after use by each group of children;
(e) ifthepoolisover4feetdeep,thereshallbealifeguard on duty who is certified by the Red Cross or other approved certification program any time children have access to the pool; and
(f) lifeguards and pool personnel shall not count toward the caregiver-to-child ratio.
(8) If offsite activities are offered:
(a) theprovidershallobtainwrittenparentalconsentbefore
each activity;
(b) the required caregiver-to-child ratio and supervision
shall be maintained during the entire activity; (c) first aid supplies, including at least antiseptic,
band-aids, and tweezers shall be available;

(d) children'snamesshallnotbeusedonnametags,t-shirts, or in other visible ways; and
(e) there shall be a way for caregivers and children to wash their hands with soap and water, or if there is no source of running water, caregivers and children shall clean their hands with wet wipes and hand sanitizer.
(9) On every offsite activity, caregivers shall take the written emergency information and releases for each child in the group. The information shall include:
(a) the child's name,
(b) the parent's name and phone number,
(c) the name and phone number of a person to notify in case
of an emergency if the parent cannot be contacted,
(d) the names of people authorized by the parents to pick up
the child, and
(e) currentemergencymedicaltreatmentandemergencymedical
transportation releases.
R430-90-19 Play Equipment
(1) The provider shall ensure that children using play equipment use it safely and in the manner intended by the manufacturer. (2) Thereshallbenoentrapmenthazardsonorwithintheusezone
of any piece of stationary play equipment.
(3) There shall be no strangulation hazards on or within the use
zone of any piece of stationary play equipment.
(4) Thereshallbenocrush,shearing,orsharpedgehazardsonor within the use zone of any piece of stationary play equipment. (5) There shall be no tripping hazards such as concrete footings,
tree stumps, tree roots, or rocks within the use zone of any
piece of stationary play equipment.
(6) Cushioningforstationaryplayequipmentshallcovertheentire
surface of each required use zone.
(7) IfASTMcushioningisused,theprovidershallkeepon-sitefor
review by the Department the documentation from the manufacturer
that the material meets ASTM Specification F1292.
(8) Stationary play equipment with a designated play surface that measures 6 inches or higher shall not be placed on a hard surface such as concrete, asphalt, dirt, or the bare floor, but may be
placed on grass or other cushioning.
(9) Except for trampolines, stationary play equipment that is 18
inches or higher shall:
(a) have a 3-foot use zone that is free of hard objects or
surfaces and that extends from the outermost edge of the
equipment; and
(b) be stable and securely anchored.
(10) A trampoline shall be considered accessible to children in care unless the trampoline:
(a) is enclosed behind at least a 3-foot high, locked fence
or barrier;
(b) has no jumping mat;
(c) is placed upside down, or
(d) isenclosedwithinatleasta6-foot-highsafetynetthat
is locked.

(11) An accessible trampoline without a safety net enclosure shall be placed at least 6 feet away from any structure or object onto which a child could fall, including play equipment, trees, and fences.
(12) An accessible trampoline with a safety net enclosure shall be place at least 3 feet away from any structure or object onto which a child could fall, including play equipment, trees, and fences if the net:
(a) is properly installed and used as specified by the manufacturer,
(b) is in good repair, and
(c) is at least 6 feet tall.
(13) An accessible trampoline shall be placed over grass, 6-inch-deep
cushioning, or ASTM-approved cushioning. Cushioning shall extend at least 6 feet from the outermost edge of the trampoline frame, or at least 3 feet from the outermost edge of the trampoline frame if a net is used as specified in R430-90-19(12).
(14) There shall be no ladders or other objects within the use zone of an accessible trampoline that a child could use to climb on the trampoline.
(15) An accessible trampoline shall have shock-absorbing pads that completely cover its springs, hooks, and frame.
(16) Before a child in care uses a trampoline, the child's parent shall sign a Department-approved permission form that the provider keeps on-site for review by the Department.
(17) When a trampoline is being used by a child in care:
(a) a caregiver shall be at the trampoline supervising, (b) only one person at a time shall use a trampoline,
(c) no child in care shall be allowed to do somersaults or
flips on the trampoline,
(d) no one shall be allowed to play under the trampoline when
it is in use, and
(e) only school age children in care shall be allowed to use
the trampoline.
R430-90-20 Transportation
If transportation services are offered:
(1) For each child being transported, the provider shall have a
transportation permission form:
(a) signed by the parent, and
(b) on-site for review by the Department.
(2) Each vehicle used for transporting children shall: (a) be enclosed with a roof or top,
(b) be equipped with safety restraints,
(c) have a current vehicle registration,
(d) be maintained in a safe and clean condition, and
(e) contain first aid supplies, including at least antiseptic,
band-aids, and tweezers.
(3) Thesafetyrestraintsineachvehiclethattransportschildren
shall:
(a) be appropriate for the age and size of each child who is
transported, as required by Utah law;
(b) be properly installed; and
(c) be in safe condition and working order.

(4) Thedriverofeachvehiclewhoistransportingchildrenshall: (a) be at least 18 years old;
(b) haveandcarrywiththemacurrent,validdriver'slicense
for the type of vehicle being driven;
(c) have with them the written emergency contact information
for each child being transported;
(d) ensurethateachchildbeingtransportedisinanindividual
safety restraint that is used according to Utah law; (e) ensurethattheinsidevehicletemperatureisbetween60-85
degrees Fahrenheit;
(f) neverleaveachildinthevehicleunattendedbyanadult;
(g) ensure that children stay seated while the vehicle is
moving;
(h) neverleavethekeysintheignitionwhennotinthedriver's
seat; and
(i) ensure that the vehicle is locked during transport.
(5) When the provider walks or uses public transportation to transport children to or from the facility, the provider shall ensure that:
(a) eachchildbeingtransportedhasacompletedtransportation
permission form signed by their parent,
(b) acaregivergoeswiththechildrenandactivelysupervises
them,
(c) the caregiver-to-child ratio is maintained, and
(d) caregivers take each child's written emergency contact
R430-90-21 Animals
information and releases with them.
(1) Theprovidershallinformparentsofthekindsofanimalsallowed at the facility.
(2) There shall be no animal on the premises that:
(a) is naturally aggressive;
(b) has a history of dangerous, attacking, or aggressive
behavior; or
(c) has a history of biting even one person.
(3) Animalsatthefacilityshallbecleanandfreeofobviousdisease or health problems that could adversely affect children.
(4) Thereshallbenoanimaloranimalequipmentinfoodpreparation or eating areas during food preparation or eating times.
(5) Childrenyoungerthan5yearsofageshallnotassistwiththe cleaning of animals or animal cages, pens, or equipment.
(6) Ifschool-agechildrenhelpinthecleaningofanimalsoranimal
equipment, the children shall wash their hands immediately after
cleaning the animal or equipment.
(7) Children and staff shall wash their hands immediately after
playing with or touching reptiles and amphibians.
(8) Dogs, cats, and ferrets that are housed at the facility shall
have current rabies vaccinations.
(9) The provider shall keep current animal vaccination records
on-site for review by the Department.

R430-90-22 Rest and Sleep
(1) The provider shall offer children in care a daily opportunity for rest or sleep in an environment with subdued lighting, a low noise level, and freedom from distractions.
(2) Naporresttimesshallnotbescheduledformorethan2hours daily.
(3) Each crib used by children shall:
(a) have a tight-fitting mattress;
(b) have slats spaced no more than 2-3/8 inches apart;
(c) have at least 20 inches from the top of the mattress to
the top of the crib rail, or at least 12 inches from the top of the mattress to the top of the crib rail if the child using the crib cannot sit up without help;
(d) not have strings, cords, ropes, or other entanglement hazards on the crib or within reach of the child; and
(e) meet CPSC standards.
(4) Sleeping equipment may not block exits.
(5) Sleepingequipmentandbeddingitemsthatareclearlyassigned
to and used by an individual child shall be cleaned and sanitized
as needed and at least weekly.
(6) Sleeping equipment and bedding items that are not clearly
assigned to and used by an individual child shall be cleaned and sanitized before each use.
R430-90-23 Diapering
If the provider accepts children who wear diapers:
(1) Caregivers shall ensure that each child's diaper is:
(a) checked at least once every 2 hours,
(b) promptly changed when wet or soiled, and (c) checked as soon as a sleeping child awakens.
(2) The diapering area shall not be located in a food preparation or eating area.
(3) Childrenshallnotbediapereddirectlyonthefloor,oronany surface used for another purpose.
(4) Thediaperingsurfaceshallbesmooth,waterproof,andingood repair.
(5) Caregiversshallcleanandsanitizethediaperingsurfaceafter each diaper change, or use a disposable, waterproof diapering surface that is thrown away after each diaper change.
(6) Caregivers shall wash their hands after each diaper change.
(7) Caregivers shall place wet and soiled disposable diapers:
(a) in a container that has a disposable plastic lining and a tight-fitting lid,
(b) directly in an outdoor garbage container that has a tight-fitting lid, or
(c) in a container that is inaccessible to children.
(8) Indoorcontainerswherewetandsoileddiapersareplacedshall
be cleaned and sanitized each day. (9) If cloth diapers are used:
(a) they shall not be rinsed at the facility; and
(b) they shall be placed directly into a leakproof container
that is inaccessible to any child and labeled with the child's name, or placed in a leakproof diapering service container.

R430-90-24 Infant and Toddler Care
If the provider cares for infants or toddlers:
(1) Each awake infant and toddler shall receive positive physical
and verbal interaction with a caregiver at least once every 20
minutes.
(2) Tostimulatetheirhealthydevelopment,theprovidershallensure
that infants receive daily interactions with adults; including on the ground interaction and closely supervised time spent in the prone position for infants younger than 6 months of age.
(3) Caregivers shall respond promptly to infants and toddlers who are in emotional distress due to conditions such as hunger, fatigue, a wet or soiled diaper, fear, teething, or illness.
(4) Fortheirhealthydevelopment,safetoysshallbeavailablefor infants and toddlers. There shall be enough toys accessible to each infant and toddler in the group to engage in play.
(5) Mobile infants and toddlers shall have freedom of movement in a safe area.
(6) Anawakeinfantortoddlershallnotbeconfinedformorethan 30 minutes in any piece of equipment, such as a swing, high chair, crib, playpen, or other similar piece of equipment.
(7) Onlyoneinfantortoddlershalloccupyanyonepieceofequipment at any time, unless the equipment has individual seats for more than one child.
(8) Infants and toddlers shall not have access to objects made of styrofoam.
(9) Each infant and toddler shall be allowed to eat and sleep on their own schedule.
(10) Baby food, formula, or breast milk that is brought from home for an individual child's use shall be:
(a) labeled with the child's name;
(b) kept refrigerated if needed; and
(c) discardedwithin24hoursofpreparationoropening,except
for unprepared powdered formula or dry food.
(11) If an infant is unable to sit upright and hold their own bottle,
acaregivershallholdtheinfantduringbottlefeeding. Bottles
shall not be propped.
(12) The caregiver shall swirl and test warm bottles for temperature
before feeding to children.
(13) Formula and milk, including breast milk, shall be discarded after
feeding or within 2 hours of starting a feeding.
(14) Caregiversshallcutsolidfoodsforinfantsintopiecesnolarger than 1/4 inch in diameter, and shall cut solid foods for toddlers
into pieces no larger than 1/2 inch in diameter.
(15) Infants shall sleep in equipment designed for sleep such as a
crib, bassinet, porta-crib or play pen. An infant shall not be placed to sleep on a mat, cot, pillow, bouncer, swing, car seat, or other similar piece of equipment unless the provider has written permission from the infant's parent.
(16) Infants shall be placed on their backs for sleeping unless there is documentation from a health care provider requiring a different sleep position.
(17) Soft toys, loose blankets, or other objects shall not be placed in cribs while in use by sleeping infants.

KEY: child care facilities, licensed family child care
Date of Enactment or Last Substantive Amendment: August 10, 2018 Notice of Continuation: May 29, 2013
Authorizing, and Implemented or Interpreted Law: 26-39-203(1)(a)

